"","x"
"1","“National Discipline: The Key to our Future”"
"2","Permit me, then, to begin this report by thanking our people for their mandate, and congratulating all those who were elected to office in the last elections."
"3","But the honor of this mandate pales beside its gravity. I interpret this mandate not just as a call to continue in office, but a summons to supreme self-exertion in the service of the nation."
"4","Our country summons us all to exert ourselves to the limit of our God-given powers, endurance, and wisdom to raise the nation to a bold, new future."
"5","The situation in the world, as well as that in the Philippines, is marked by sweeping change."
"6","We cannot move forward within the grooves of old habits and outmoded institutions. Progress demands that the barriers of centuries be broken."
"7","But the pursuit of development and the breaking of barriers to progress require such energy and endurance as may strain our resources, both of the public and the private sectors. Thus, the balance of payments problem is now the most immediate and urgent challenge facing our country."
"8","But from an intimate knowledge of our problems, I know and I say that there is no reason to be afraid of the dollar gap. It can and will be bridged in a short time. We should be more concerned about the moral gap—a gap in our self-confidence and our strength of purpose as a nation, a gap that threatens all classes of people in all stations of life."
"9","We must turn these difficulties and problems into opportunities to strengthen our moral fiber as a people, to temper our will and character, to imbue the nation with a permanent sense of discipline so necessary to the achievement of progress."
"10","Today, we must offer the alternative to anarchy—a constructive nationalism, not a vituperative chauvinism."
"11","There is ferment and a desire for change. Many cannot describe, nor do they know, the change that they aspire for, but the instinct is there; let the leaders in government help define and outline it for them."
"12","We must offer reforms in the electoral system, abolish social iniquity, work out a government machinery reorganization, provide a modernized penal system, discard feudalism and at the same time oppose fascism."
"13","We must be understanding, even with those who refuse to understand us."
"14","For when we establish priorities in development, many will question their lack of standing in such a plan of development as well as in the listing of expenditures. Sometimes we must suffer in silence, for they will question not only our acts but also our motives as well. Silent we will be, aware as we are that ultimately—as the expression goes—the truth will out, as it always will. These are hazards of authority and leadership. This is the measure of responsibility. You and I must patiently explain."
"15","Government today is often charged with being insensitive, likened to a corporation without a soul. We must demonstrate that government does have the capacity for compassion—for the weak, the underprivileged, and the destitute. All the agencies of the government must respond to the needs and problems of the common people."
"16","Our confidence in the future rests on a solid base, namely, our present achievements. The past four years have shown that the spirit of the Filipino people, properly challenged, will more than match the dimensions of the challenges they have to confront."
"17","The only condition is that the nation discipline itself towards its goals. I am not speaking of discipline imposed by a tyrannical government, but of self-discipline in the active exercise of freedom."
"18","Discipline is our salvation as a nation and the key to our future greatness."
"19","We can no longer plead as an excuse immaturity or smallness in the world. We have grown in population to 37 million people, making us the 15th largest nation. Among the developing countries, we rank seventh in the world in population. Countries similar to us in geographical area, such as Great Britain and Japan, have demonstrated their capacity to become world leaders. We do not, we need not, aspire to world leadership. We do have the potential to play a larger role in world affairs. But first, we must acquire the discipline of self-denial, the ability to sacrifice present gratification and ease for permanent and lasting national progress."
"20","I ask the leaders of our government—including the members of the Seventh Congress—to set the example and lead the way for national self-discipline."
"21","Let me now turn to the facts of our economy."
"22","The economic difficulties—namely, the balance of payments problem and inflation—that beset us are consequences of the massive capital expenditures that we made and not of stagnation. As such, they are temporary and can be surmounted. But to surmount them, we need strength of purpose and discipline. We have to subordinate our personal desires to the needs and aspirations of the nation. We have to train ourselves to use our resources carefully and fruitfully."
"23","To get an overview of our economic state and to provide a context for our new programs, allow me to review the economic gains of the past four years."
"24","In those four years, we sought to retrieve the economy from stagnation and decay, and in 1969 it was possible for us to see that our labors had paid off. Revived in purpose and seeking. To pursue larger goals, we found the evidence of our achievement not only in concrete roads, bridges, schoolhouses, and other such palpable things but above all in the new determination of the people and government not to cruise along its difficulties but rather to confront them with all the resources at our command."
"25","At this point, it is important to note three salient points relevant to economic activity:"
"26","Job opportunities in 1969 maintained the annual average increase of 647,000 new jobs, which represents 220% increase over the 1965 figures. This massive increase is of particular significance because its main beneficiary was the rural areas, where employment opportunities soared to a record annual average of 453,000."
"27","The principal targets in our economic development plan have been exceeded. You are aware of the figures and I shall not repeat them."
"28","The International Monetary Fund consultative team is now studying with our monetary authorities the courses open to us without devaluation and without controls."
"29","In the meantime, I have insisted that the plight of our economy be alleviated by the lifting of the suspension of guarantees by the Development Bank of the Philippines and the Philippine National Bank and the allowance of the importation of essential consumer goods."
"30","In the meantime, we must be patient even with the most impatient among our people. No one is more in a hurry for development and for improvements than I. But I repeat I must balance the public good against the welfare of the few, and naturally you and I must always choose the general welfare against limited welfare."
"31","But we must be understanding to even those who refuse to understand us. This must be our policy."
"32","Since then, our Board of Investments has approved as of 1969, 128 projects from 221 applications."
"33","This is an experiment. It is my hope that once this succeeds you will be able to establish other free trade zones in other ports of the country. The economic benefits that this will generate are tremendous and far-reaching. The free trade zone has aroused enthusiastic interest not only here but abroad."
"34","Production of precious metals, including platinum and palladium, for 1969, reached a total of P124.6 million; base metals, P607.3 million; nonmetals, including cement, P316.2 million."
"35","Our economy is on the verge of take off to self-sustaining growth. Measured against 1967 prices, our gross national product for 1969 reached P27.783 billion, surpassing planned targets by 9.4%."
"36","More important, we successfully increased the absorptive capacity of our economy for investments through government infrastructure investments, incentives and assistance to private industry. We have arrested the erratic fluctuation of our economy and maintained consistent growth."
"37","The year 1969 was marked by deterioration in the foreign exchange position of the Philippines accompanied by expansion in money supply and a relatively modest rate of increase in prices."
"38","Rice, roads, schools, and other essential projects of the government, as well as the capital goods required by an expanding industrial sector, were the factors, in concrete form, which helped increase money supply and weighed heavily on the demand for imports. Directly, the implementation of these programs required the importation of many types of machinery, communications equipment, railway, and other transport equipment. Indirectly, through the purchasing power released in the wake of their implementation, these programs also gave rise to increased demand for imported consumer goods and for domestically produced goods. Since the production of the latter required the heavy importation of raw materials, increased demand for domestic goods also meant added pressure on the country’s limited supply of foreign exchange."
"39","Another major cause in the reduction of the foreign exchange resources was the higher level of activity of business firms, particularly those in the export sector. As in the case of firms producing goods for domestic consumption, these export firms were heavily dependent on imported machinery as well as imported raw materials to bring about an expansion in their production."
"40","A third cause of the heavy demand for foreign exchange which, however, could only be indirectly traced to the excessive credit for monetary expansion in the economy was of more recent origin. These were the speculatory activities centering on devaluation and exchange controls, which induced business firms to import more than their normal requirements and build up their inventories, thus contributing to the fall in the reserve."
"41","In the face of all these problems, the Central Bank has made the following moves: (1) raised the reserve requirement of all banking institutions by two percentage points; and (2) raised the rate of special time deposit (STD) requirements in order to mop up excess liquidity."
"42","A related measure to these twin deflationary moves was the adoption of a program of dispersing part of money supply, now overly concentrated in centers of population, to the rural areas; this should lead to a reduction in the velocity of circulation of money, an effect equivalent to a reduction in the volume of money."
"43","Cognizant of the initial effects that these new measures would have on production, employment and prices, the Central Bank further took steps to ensure the immediate and continuous availability of raw supplies and materials to industrial establishments. These firms were allowed to open automatically letters of credit equivalent to 55% of their 1968 importations, spread out on a quarterly basis."
"44","For the long run, in order to revise the production patterns of the economy, measures have been devised to promote a more outward-looking, export-oriented type of development. In cooperation with other government agencies, the Central Bank stands ready to adopt additional facilities for export industries. With the support given to these industries, the heavy dependence of the economy on imports should be reduced. The wherewithal to provide the foreign exchange necessary for imports or for such other imports, which an increase in foreign exchange earnings (and thus in money supply) will induce, will be forthcoming."
"45","If these and other monetary and fiscal measures that are being considered can be successfully implemented, then the base will have been laid for an economic structure that will not only be able to overcome the present foreign exchange difficulties of the country but also enable the country to achieve a consistently high rate of growth."
"46","Our economy has been temporarily placed in a straitjacket."
"47","This emphasizes the need to promote and to diversify exports."
"48","This is a far cry from the average 5.0 and 5.9% increases in consumer prices we experienced in 1966 and 1967, and way below worldwide trends of spiraling prices. Forty-one countries surveyed in 1968 showed price increases ranging from 12 to 455%."
"49","Except for August and December when speculation unnecessarily raised prices by 2.1% and 2.5%, respectively, monthly increases in prices in 1969 consistently remained below 1%."
"50","In the Bureau of Customs, these reforms included administrative measures for greater autonomy in different offices, adoption of the “immediate payment system” in obtaining the release of importations from Customs, the standardization of the classification and valuation of imports, upgrading of law enforcement agencies, expansion and improvement of port facilities, opening of new principal ports of entry, and providing new incentives to boost tourism."
"51","Erring personnel were dealt with accordingly. One hundred ninety-six criminal cases were filed against officials and employees in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, and 215 cases were filed against undesirable employees and officials in the Bureau of Customs."
"52","Treasury operations were improved. From FY 1966 to FY 1969, the total gross receipts of the National Treasury accruing to the general fund amounted to P9,994.96 million, an increase of P2,640.72 million or 35.9% over the period from FY 1962 to FY 1965."
"53","The net receipts of the general fund during the last four years were P8,835.10 million compared to P6,348.65 million under the previous administration, an increase of P2,456.56 million or 33.5%."
"54","We upgraded the management of the public debt by establishing a Treasury Bills Program and developing a Bill Market, issuing Tax Anticipation Bills, issuing the “Gold Subsidy Series” of treasury bills, and creating the Financial Policy Committee."
"55","We stabilized the embroidery industry."
"56","In general, we protected Philippine industries, either through the imposition of special dumping duties or through the prohibition of entry, or control, of the quantity of imports that may injure, or prevent the establishment of, local industries."
"57","The Rice and Corn Administration may have to be authorized to issue export licenses to private traders at a pro rata share based on the milling capacity of their respective millers. In general, export licenses must be issued only for the export of high-quality long-grain varieties, unless it is clearly shown by the exporter that a demand exists for the medium and short-grain varieties."
"58","During the same period, it constructed more than 57,100 schoolrooms all over the country."
"59","For flood control, it constructed 26 kilometers of earth dikes, 4,678 lineal meters of revetments, and dredged about 3,274,000 cubic meters."
"60","In portworks, it constructed 18.5 foreign berths, 53.5 domestic berths, and 50 lightcraft berths. It also constructed a substantial number of warehouses and cargo sheds, causeways and bulkheads, seawalls, and has reclaimed more than 2 hectares as port area."
"61","The Civil Aeronautics Administration finished 50 projects and installed 18 air navigational systems."
"62","The Bureau of Telecommunications has established 1,319 telegraph and radiotelegraph stations around the country."
"63","Microwave links are also being established; 13 VHP/UHF radio stations have been completed."
"64","During the period covered, the Irrigation Services Unit installed 4,837 pump units benefitting an area of more than 128,000 hectares of riceland, capable of producing 10,000,000 cavans of palay per year."
"65","The Central Bank index of physical volume in manufacturing corroborates the trend. Manufacturing output rose by 31.2% from 196.7 in 1962 to 200.9 in 1965 as compared to a rise of 59.8% from 218.6 in 1966 to 258.8 in 1969. Nondurable manufactures gained by 27.7% during the period 1962-1965 as against a gain of 35.5% during the period 1966-1969, while durable manufactures increased by 48.1% for the same periods"
"66","In domestic trade, Filipino participation in the retail trade significantly increased since the Nationalization Act of 1954. This increase is a reflection of the implementation of the law. For the period 1966 to 1968, 94.8% of new retailers were Filipinos with an average capitalization of 87.5% of the total capital. For the previous four-year period, Filipino participation in the retail trade was only 90.6%, with a capitalization of only 88.3%."
"67","This marketing scheme is intended to stabilize, and perhaps even to decrease, the prices of prime commodities."
"68","This trade imbalance, however, was caused by importations of capital equipment, raw materials, and semiprocessed goods by our various industries."
"69","Of the total value of imports during the Calendar Year 1965, 87.4% was spent for the purchase of machinery and equipment, raw materials, and supplies, and only 12.6% for consumer goods. For the year 1968, the relative percentages of imports of producer and consumer goods were 88.3% and 11.2%, respectively."
"70","Thus, the trade imbalance has been largely brought about by the expanding industrial development of the country. However, there is a built-in correction in the imbalance, for once these industries begin to produce with the equipment imported, they will augment their own domestic requirements, substitute the goods currently imported, and provide a surplus for export."
"71","Eventually, therefore, this imbalance will relieve the pressures on our international reserves and thus strengthen the country’s credit and financial position abroad."
"72","In terms of domestic investments alone, as of September 30, 1969, the capitalization of the 34,274 NACIDA-registered producers increased by P16,327,988.47 from a total of P63,860,991.72 in June 1968, making the capitalization total P80,188,980.19. These NACIDA-registered producers today employ 598,100 workers."
"73","Last October 7, 1969, we inaugurated the joint RP-Japan Technological and Development Center. In this modern laboratory in Marikina, Rizal, bamboocraft, rattancraft, ceramics, fibercraft, woodworking, forging, and small machine parts manufacture will be taught."
"74","We cannot let this opportunity for economic takeoff pass. Developed countries keep moving and other developing countries keep developing. The more we delay, the greater will be the gap between us and the advanced countries, the harder it will be to catch up or compete with them. Furthermore, a hesitation today will mean the negation of all our efforts and sacrifices in the past."
"75","The next step is the stimulation of regional markets. Plans are in process to establish a number of free ports throughout the country to encourage direct regional exports to international markets. We intend to emphasize the development of secondary urban centers as growth points in each region through our capital expenditures program in the years to come. We have already started to decentralize industry away from Greater Manila; we shall provide additional incentives for further decentralization to these regional centers. The dispersal of institutions of higher learning and hospital facilities is to be encouraged. The reorganization and revitalization of regional development authorities under competent administrators shall be pursued. Finally, increased emphasis shall be given to the exploitation of mineral, marine, and agricultural resources on a regional level as the basis for stimulating regional income."
"76","This growth rate in GNP and per capita income is sufficiently healthy to prevent unemployment, and at the same time sufficiently modest by now established Philippine standards to enable the stabilization and restructuring of our economy."
"77","To achieve these goals, we shall follow various major policies, of which the more important are"
"78","To insure continued and accelerated growth in the future, the national government commits itself to the following undertakings:"
"79","A. Capital Formation"
"80","The infrastructure program will be continued. Highway expenditures will be limited to those portions previously identified and recommended by the transport survey for their high benefit-cost ratios. The feeder road program will be expanded to catch up with the increased growth of agricultural production."
"81","Our infrastructure program will be geared to support tourism and the export trade."
"82","The capital formation budget for the national government will be as follows:"
"83","Having attained surplus production in our basic staple, the agricultural program will expand production in other food and cash crops, especially export crops."
"84","Agricultural credit will be assured through the rechanneling of excess liquidity from consumption into agricultural production. The Central Bank envisions some P250 million for this in 1970."
"85","Unlimited credit will be provided by the Central Bank for export as well as domestic production. Credit for importations will, however, remains restrictive. Guarantees for foreign loans by the DBP and the PNB will be issued selectively and confined primarily to priorities specified by the Board of Investments."
"86","Incentives and protection will be afforded Filipino retailers to broaden and upgrade the Filipino entrepreneurial base. Relevant government institutions like the Department of Commerce and Industry will be mobilized to extend the necessary assistance."
"87","C. Fiscal Planning"
"88","In all these developments, the policy of fiscal restraint will be adhered to. Our aim is not to increase expenditures but to restructure or to rechannel expenditures to promote greater economic growth."
"89","Total government expenditures level for 1971 will be maintained at 1970 levels. Capital formation and improved and increased developmental expenditures will be funded from the increased tax take, and savings from government reorganization and rechanneling of government expenditures."
"90","For 1971, we envision a cutback on current expenditures on goods and services of P120 million and P20 million on subsidies. This cutback will enable developmental services to expand by P140 million."
"91","Receipts from current revenues are expected to increase by P190 million, plus P420 million to be generated from the 12 new tax measures passed in 1968 and 1969 and the additional tax measures to be presented to this Congress session. The new taxes will dampen inflationary pressures, allow for freer government credit to the private sector, as well as enable a substantial portion of the infrastructure program to be financed by noninflationary means. Domestic borrowing for the capital development programs will be limited to P240 million and will come from noninflationary sources such as GSIS, SSS, and the common bond sinking fund."
"92","D. Solution of Balance of Payments Problem and Inflation"
"93","The most crucial economic problem we face today is our balance of payments. This is a problem caused by the development process. Specifically, it arose from the enthusiasm of the private sector to import more capital goods. Thus, although imports of consumer goods dropped to 12.6%, imports of capital goods increased to 87.4%."
"94","To meet this problem, we have had to adopt certain measures, among them the suspension of certain projects and the restriction of credit."
"95","I have already discussed this problem and its solution."
"96","E. New Strategy for International Trade"
"97","The economic program shall give utmost priority to the foreign exchange earning sectors of the economy; this priority shall be enforced in the lending programs of government financial institutions, in tax incentive and funding legislation to be proposed to Congress, in the allocation of the budget of the national government and through all the multiple channels available to government in the management of the economy. The monetary authorities have already enacted initial measures to encourage exports. It is expected that monetary and financial policy shall further orient assistance towards the tourist and export industries."
"98","The Philippines intends to be active in international markets. Our trading strategy shall be dictated by the following criteria:"
"99","In this interim, we shall have to seek program loans and we may have to face some uncertainty. But we face these uncertainties with much in our favor. We are currently working at lowering trade barriers between ourselves and the Eastern Socialist countries. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations is progressing rapidly towards economic cooperation and integration. We are seeking congressional approval of an omnibus tariff bill, a bill that will enable our industries to compete more vigorously in international markets as well as provide us with the flexibility to enter into tariff agreements to our advantage."
"100","We are growing at a rate which ordinary laissez faire techniques cannot sustain. In moving into the export markets, we enter into competition with developed economies sustained by highly efficient firms. To compete with them, we must not only husband our resources but we must also program them with equal efficiency. This requires true nationalism, discipline, and sacrifice on our part."
"101","In my second term, government will continue to perform its new role as the ally of the deprived and the unfortunate. It will continue not only to heed the clamor for change but to lead all sectors of society in translating that clamor into real prosperity and contentment among our people. Government, its conscience awakened, will continue to strive for true and enduring social justice. We have narrowed the gap between the rich and the poor. The years ahead will be devoted to further reform and innovation that will destroy class barriers in Filipino society."
"102","As we enter into our second term, we pledge full commitment to the implementation of the land reform program. We are determined to pursue social justice hand in hand with economic development."
"103","I am aware, as you all are, that economic development is futile and short-lived if it fails to make its benefits felt among the masses of neglected and underprivileged."
"104","We have therefore inaugurated the Human Resources Development Program. This will increase our people’s capacity to take advantage of opportunities created through development."
"105","The improvement of our health services has also been a principal program of the administration. The emphasis in this program has been on providing more services to the rural areas, where they are most needed. To date, we have a total of 1,459 rural health units operating throughout the country—an average of one unit serving 24,594 citizens."
"106","In education, we have confronted the short-run and immediate problems forthrightly and successfully. We had a total of 49,000 elementary school classes added to the public schools system from 1966 to 1969; we produced 90,986 classrooms. This compares favorably with the 800 classrooms produced or constructed from 1962 to 1965, when the total number of new classes was 48,000. Thus, we have favorably solved the problem of accommodation in the schools, which was a principal cause of poor instruction and of a high dropout rate."
"107","The administration of justice has become more efficient and speedy with the creation of special courts to augment the work of the regular courts. For years, the number of cases filed in court annually had always exceeded the number of cases disposed of. But in 1969, the courts of justice effected a dramatic reversal of this trend."
"108","But despite the impressive performance of our courts last year, the backlog of cases dating even before 10 years ago continues to be our primary concern."
"109","More judges are needed. The ideal ratio between judge and population is 1 judge for every 50,000 people; but now this ratio is 1 for every 150,000, truly far from the optimum that a judge could serve effectively."
"110","Our problems in the administration of justice have not, however, deterred us from carrying out a bold and successful peace and order program. This has been possible despite certain abnormal circumstances."
"111","A close examination of these elements makes only one conclusion possible—that the peace and order condition in the Philippines compares favorably with the rest of the world."
"112","This comparative stability has been possible despite the heavy pressures of a high rate of population increase. As everyone knows by now, the Philippines has one of the highest rates of population growth in the world. Former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara once reported that, at its present rate of population increase—3.5%—the Philippines is on a par with only one other country in the world, India. Considering the direct proportion between “population explosion,” with its accompanying phenomena like industrialization, urbanization, slums, and various tensions, conflicts, and new social relationships, the Philippines should logically be afflicted today with one of the world’s highest crime rates."
"113","On the contrary, it has one of the lowest in the world."
"114","True enough, the volume of crime in the Philippines has increased—I must add, inevitably—but the crime rate per 100,000 population has decreased. The volume of crime rose by 10.5% over a seven-year period; on the other hand, the crime rate per 100,000 population decreased by 13.4%. What does this mean? It means that although the population has grown tremendously over the years, the Filipino citizen today faces less risk of being victimized in a crime than in the early ‘60s."
"115","This decrease in crime rate, or decrease in personal risk, was particularly notable between the years 1967 and 1968. In 1968, the third year of my administration, the crime rate fell by 28%, to 150 per 100,000 populations. This was the lowest crime rate since 1959."
"116","What makes this record even more significant is that, as I have pointed out, we are also burdened by a condition that is not experienced by other countries. Central Luzon, the traditional seat of social unrest, has contributed heavily to the escalation of crime figures."
"117","As everybody knows, the murders, homicides, and kidnappings which have resulted from the unrest and dissidence in Central Luzon have been indiscriminately recorded as acts of simple criminality in the statistics of crime, thus considerably increasing the visible signs of public disorder and producing a false picture of peace and order in the country."
"118","In other words, without the crimes which should properly be distinguished as results of the insurgency in Central Luzon, the crime volume and crime rate in the Philippines would have been even less."
"119","This has been possible because of the administration’s three major programs against crime, namely: the improvement of our capability for crime prevention, improvement of law enforcement, and improvement of the administration of justice."
"120","Another reason for the comparatively stable peace and order situation in the Philippines is the improvement in the economic condition, brought about by breakthroughs in food production, infrastructure, and foreign trade. Over the past four years, many of our people have experienced enough improvement in their living conditions to be able to discard the despair of the past and begin to entertain hopes of a good future. This has helped ease the social and private tensions that are often a source of increased criminality."
"121","The program against crime has had to be carried out with scant resources. For instance, I have been constrained to draw from savings of the executive department to finance the purchase of better police equipment needed by some local governments."
"122","In this and other creative ways, the administration put to good use the same meager resources that were available to earlier administrations."
"123","We cannot say that the problem of dissidence can be solved tomorrow or the next week or even a year from now. We delude ourselves in thinking that a final solution by military means can be found. For revolt in any of its forms invariably has a deeper root in the thinking, the aspirations, and the psychology of the group in revolt."
"124","That is why the government has launched a development program in Central Luzon in which currently about 48 national government agencies are taking part. In the past three years, more than a hundred million pesos has been spent on various development programs in this region; almost the whole region has been placed under land reform."
"125","Our program in Central Luzon is to be pursued patiently and with vigor whether the Huks exist or not. In a sense, it is a proving ground for the proposition that democratic government can be an effective instrument for social change and social justice."
"126","The military, of course, have their own duty to deal with unbridled violence. Progress can hardly be attained in an atmosphere of constant fear and danger to life and property. Since early last year, we have increased the strength and capability of the PC in Central Luzon. Whereas there were a mere 1,000 in the six provinces of Central Luzon two years ago, there are now or will be, when all the PHILCAG elements are fielded, more than 3,000. It is paradoxical that while the government is actually engaged in putting down an armed threat to the State, we have actually now more troops engaged in development work than we have engaged in combat."
"127","We are meeting this rebellion with just enough force to cope with open violence and the threat to life and property, not forgetting that the few misguided individuals are part of our people. The programs of development are directed to the welfare of the people as a whole."
"128","The Armed Forces therefore are engaged in civic and social action—those small-scale, short-term direct help that the military provide in terms of health services and other direct services. PHILCAG will engage in long-term construction and improvement of facilities and communications. They will reinforce the civilian agencies in the Central Luzon Development Program that are engaged in social and economic uplift on the principle of self-help, self-determination, and social cooperation."
"129","It is in this spirit, too, that now we are undertaking the military actions against actual violence with the closer and more active participation of the mass of the people. I refer to the new concept of the barrio home defense, as recommended by the field officers engaged in Central Luzon. It has been said that a people get the government they deserve. By the same token, the peace and order that a locality will get is what the people in that locality strive and work for. Recent developments in Central Luzon indicate that the people in those beleaguered provinces have become so fed up with dissident threats and violence that they have volunteered to take on the fight themselves with, of course, the active help and support of our regular forces."
"130","In Pampanga, almost all the mayors are committed to the program; in southern Tarlac where the “Ma-Mao” is active in three towns including part of the capital, the mayors and rural leaders have become so involved in the program that as a result, the so-called New People’s Army had to take stem countermeasures against the very people they were ostensibly protecting from abuses of the government, by an orgy of killings and indiscriminate armed attacks. Not against combat troops, but against the defenseless barrio people."
"131","The First PC Zone reports that there are 50 barrios that have fully organized their barrio home defense forces, and many more barrios are being organized. Eventually about 400 barrios will be organized in the provinces of Pampanga, Tarlac, Nueva Ecija, and Bataan. A barrio home defense unit is composed of 10 male volunteers from the barrio under the close supervision of a five-man control and training team of the military. Its mission is to protect the barrio from dissident depredation, threat, and exploitation, and to deny to the enemy the resources in food, money, shelter, and other forms of support that he could get if the barrio were defenseless and afraid."
"132","There are some who have voiced reasonable fears about the concept. Not a few, for example, believe that we have merely revived the once despised civilian guards. Others fear that the home defense forces might conceivably be used by local political leaders for their own ends. To these well-meaning doubters, it may be explained that the barrio home defense unit consists of volunteers from within the barrio. They are trained and closely supervised by responsible noncommissioned officers of the PC or Army. These volunteers are not going to be controlled by any local politician, big or small; their arms are secured in storage in the military detachment when they are not on duty; and none of the volunteers will be employed in any mission outside their barrio except when actually defending a nearby barrio under direct armed attack."
"133","Through the Commission on National Integration and the Presidential Assistant on National Minorities (PANAMIN), we have reclaimed thousands from a life of backwardness and deprivation and brought them into the stream of national progress."
"134","The acceleration of the housing program has been a major concern of my first administration. I propose to redouble the pace of construction and resettlement in my second term. Economic development will be meaningless unless low-cost housing is made possible for the bulk of the population in urban as well as in rural areas."
"135","As another means of enriching the life of our people, this administration recognizes the indispensable role of science and technology in national development. Through the National Science Development Board, the government is determined to develop the country’s resources and to apply these resources to the acceleration of the economic, social, and cultural progress of the country."
"136","Let us examine more closely the individual fields of activity through which the government has sought, and will continue to seek, social reform and develop our human resources."
"137","With the present high growth rate of the population, we should have more rural health units in our efforts to implement fully Republic Act 3797, entitled “An Act Strengthening Health and Dental Services in the Rural Areas.”"
"138","The Philippine General Hospital, originally created as a training hospital for the UP College of Medicine, is one such government hospital that has been forced to operate beyond its normal capacity. As a vital link in the administration’s program to serve the hospital needs of the people, it deserves more support from the national government."
"139","Courts of First Instance nationwide scored a disposal ratio above 105%. Municipal courts averaged 102%. City courts also reached above 102%. In Manila, where crime density is highest, the Courts of First Instance averaged over 120%. And all the circuit criminal courts, fully operative only this year, lived up fully to public trust by dispensing impartial justice promptly. The Manila Circuit Criminal Court, for example, disposed of 483 cases out of 623 filed during the year."
"140","The special courts matched the impressive performance of the regular courts. Their disposal ratios for 1969 are 105% in the Court of Agrarian Relations, 101% in the Court of Industrial Relations, and 129% in the Court of Tax Appeals. Of 45 tax court decisions appealed to the Supreme Court, 43 were affirmed and one merely modified, while one was reversed."
"141","This performance of the judiciary is best reflected in the fact that at the end of last year, fewer cases were pending in court: only 81,239 as of the year-end compared to 85,341 in 1968."
"142","Substantive and procedural reforms continue to be our concern. We are now implementing the equalization of caseload among municipal courts as well as providing further assistance to overburdened CFI salas."
"143","Even more significant, the Department of Justice has installed a computer program exclusively for criminal cases. It is now possible to tell promptly the stage which a particular case has reached, from filing to conviction or acquittal. In a matter of minutes, the judge’s performance record on criminal cases can be reliably retrieved. Undue delay is therefore checked promptly. And our court administrators can now pinpoint and correct defects, if any, in the criminal justice process."
"144","The relentless campaign against graft and corruption to maintain the people’s faith in government continues. Those executive officials, judges, prosecutors, fiscals, and other national officials accused of wrongdoing have been investigated, and those guilty held accountable. It secured, for example, the conviction of a suburban mayor in the traffic reflectors case, now on appeal. For cause, 14 judges have been suspended, removed, or dismissed, bringing to a total of 30 the judges found erring since 1966."
"145","For the first time, the Philippine Government, through the department, has asserted its right to exercise criminal jurisdiction over criminal offenses in military bases and those committed elsewhere by U.S. military personnel and civilian components where those cases are beyond the competence of courts martial under U.S. law. Henceforth, Philippine courts and fiscals offices will take cognizance of such cases."
"146","An objective analysis will show that while demands for their services have rapidly expanded, there had been no systematic or commensurate support in terms of men, money, and material for our justice agencies. Consistently, the Department of Justice has received less than 2.5% of the national budget. As new duties are laid on the department, its material requirements also increase and must be met if it must fulfill its tasks successfully."
"147","The workload of the Office of the Solicitor General has more than doubled since more courts have been created and more cases appealed. But there has been no corresponding increase in its personnel. The Courts of Agrarian Relations, which are involved in land reform, urgently need competent special field attorneys. The Juvenile and Domestic Relations Courts in Manila, Quezon City, and Iloilo require social workers and technical men, which, at present, they just borrow from other offices. The Court of Industrial Relations must have a striking force capable of responding to urgent cases at places of labor unrest. The Bureau of Prisons needs expert services in psychiatry and psychology for certain inmates. The per capita subsistence allowance for prison inmates is only P0.70, an unrealistic amount. The Deportation Board has no sala or hearing room, nor personnel of its own; its clerical staff is borrowed from different offices. Almost all regular courts, special courts, and fiscals’ offices require minimal library facilities and research material to speed up their disposition of cases. Moreover, certain judges have had no salas of their own nor adequate security and other facilities. The Board of Pardons and Parole has 19,516 released prisoners under its surveillance spread nationwide, but its limited manpower cannot cope with them. Our prisons are so congested that there had been a recurrence of serious disturbances commonly called riots so that now the dispersal of prisoners, particularly gang members, is imperative."
"148","To insure that never again will judicial output of disposed cases fall below par, we will maintain closer supervision of the operations of our courts. Certificates of work accomplished will be scrutinized, and in case of any falsification, prompt action will be taken. No judge will be promoted or transferred if his sala has a heavy backlog of cases. Performance of judges due for retirement or wishes to resign will be assessed so that none will leave unless all cases already submitted for decision are disposed of within a reasonable time. Only those employees, particularly stenographers, whose performance is beyond reproach will be considered for advancement."
"149","While observing retrenchment measures to promote austerity and economy in the public service, we will also focus on revenue-producing functions of the department. Increased earnings for the government will be stressed through intensified, prompt, and proper collections of fees and dues. Promotion of tourism and investments will be supported through appropriate bureaus like the Bureau of Immigration. The police agencies, the fiscals’ offices, and the courts will render prompt assistance to our visitors who are victims of crime and other offenses. At the same time, we will press for the implementation of laws designed to enhance law and order as well as reforms, such as the expropriation and redistribution of landed estates, to promote our economic development and social justice."
"150","We have increased the general fund support for state colleges and universities by 30%, the highest in our history."
"151","We have organized a fund for assistance to private education, which provides grants, loans, and other aid to improve the facilities and raise the quality of instruction and research in our private higher education institutions."
"152","We have, for the first time in our history, organized an education planning office to rationalize the management of our educational system by developing a systems approach to education and thereby relating it to our needs and resources."
"153","Meantime, the President’s Educational Survey Commission has been organized. This commission will recommend ways and means to research our broad human resources development goals, to relate educational operations to manpower requirements, to channel national resources to strategic educational projects, to promote development-oriented values in our schools, and to improve the management and structure of the entire educational system."
"154","Such recommendations of the commission as are adopted will be implemented partly through external financing, for which the preliminary steps have already been undertaken."
"155","The task ahead in education is one of creative transformation, the clearing away of outworn attitudes and behaviors, and the utilization of our investment in learning and training to the optimum, in order that our educational system shall become a beneficial and enlightened partnership between our generation and that of the young Filipinos, in whose behalf we labor and spend."
"156","One of the principal projects in our educational reform program is the establishment of more trade schools. The beginnings of industrialization in almost all countries are the small machine shops and workshops. Unless we train the young in trade schools in coordination with the manpower development training program, we will not be able to encourage the growth of small machine shops and workshops in this country."
"157","We raised the level of trade unionism. We registered 1,771 new labor unions, extending protection and the benefits of trade unionism to about 100,000 more workers."
"158","Industrial peace was enhanced. We cut down the incidence of strikes by 67% compared with the average during the previous administration."
"159","We upgraded the enforcement of labor and social laws. Increased attention was given to the protection of migrant workers, domestic help, and other unorganized and underprivileged workers. These initial efforts will be accelerated in 1970."
"160","We gave the country its first workable manpower development program. In less than two years, some 100,000 out-of-school youth and jobless young adults learned valuable skills in some 186 training centers throughout the country. The majority of these trainees have found employment or have otherwise become self-employed."
"161","Job opportunities in the last four years increased by 220% to an annual average of 647,000. Rural employment soared to a record annual average of 453,000."
"162","For the first time in over 20 years, we succeeded in concluding two base labor agreements with the United States government, improving the working and living conditions of about 75,000 Filipino workers employed in U.S. military bases in the Philippines and abroad."
"163","Some of the most enlightened labor legislations and policies in our country were carried out during the previous administration. These include the Medicare Act, the Manpower and Youth Development Act, the vigorous implementation of land reform, and mass housing for workers."
"164","We have become a major voice in Asian labor affairs and have strengthened our bonds with the International Labor Organization. As a consequence, we shall establish before the end of the year a NationalSkillsTrainingCenter. An ILO area office has been established in Manila."
"165","Corollary to manpower development, we have given new emphasis to manpower conservation. The promotion of industrial health and safety is now one of the major features of our labor program."
"166","The unification of labor has found support in recent years. We shall encourage and support any move to unify our working classes."
"167","Labor has also enjoyed the widest freedom of expression under our administration. Labor shall increasingly be heard and represented in the major policy-making councils of government."
"168","Though less than a year old at the start of 1969, the Department of Social Welfare was able to launch an expanded program designed to improve the lot of our underprivileged. The government budget for FY 1969-1970 provided P16,135,000 for social welfare, the biggest sum yet allocated for social welfare."
"169","In its basic objective, the government’s social welfare program remained the same. We sought to provide more and better opportunities for advancement among the underprivileged Filipinos so that they could rise above their submarginal existence, economically and socially."
"170","What was new in the department’s operations in 1969 was the veering way from the traditional form of help such as relief and institutional care to a concerted development among welfare clients of the capacity for self-determination, independence, and self-respect. To this basic reorientation, there was complementary success in the establishment of modern and improved facilities for the program; the recruitment and training of skilled manpower for social work; and the participation of local governments in welfare projects. In this manner, the government was able to intensify its welfare services and reached a new group of people whose continued existence without the benefit of these social services threaten the peace and security of our society. These developments significantly contributed to the building of a new image for the government’s social welfare program and agencies."
"171","The activities of the Department of Social Welfare during the past year may be classified under three main areas of interest: family welfare services, child and youth welfare services, and vocational rehabilitation."
"172","Family welfare services consisted of direct financial and material aid to families in distress, education and counseling, community services, economic advancement, and substitute home placement. Financial aid to needy families consisted of P100 a month per family, and this aid was extended to a total number of 931 families during the past year. A general assistance fund was also set up for the extension of limited financial and material help to other needy families. Under this fund, 10,480 families were served in 1969. Under family life education and counseling, 192 families were served. Under community services, which consisted of organization activities outside or inside community service center, there are now five community centers in operation serving an estimated total of 10,000 families. Under economic advancement services, 3,481 income-producing projects were organized and assisted."
"173","Child and youth welfare services were intensified through the expanded operation of existing government institutions and the creation of new projects. The Elsie Gaches Village was expanded to become the National Center for Disabled Children, and this was complemented by the establishment of the Nayon ng Kabataan and by the department’s assistance to various boys’ institutions all over the country."
"174","Besides serving children with special needs, the Child and Youth Welfare Program sought the enhancement of opportunities for homeless children, delinquent minors, special youth groups, and children in the rural areas. Under this part of the program, the total number of persons served is estimated at around 10,000 children during the last year."
"175","The vocational rehabilitation program was expanded in 1969 to reach a new group of clients, such as released prisoners, recovered drug addicts, recovered alcoholics, and negative hansenites in addition to the blind, the deaf-mute, and the lame. A guidance clinic program is being developed for the benefit of this special group of clients in addition to existing services which may also be dispensed to them as found necessary. A rehabilitation guidance clinic has been established and is at present initially serving about 100 clients."
"176","That promise we are resolved to fulfill."
"177","The Land Bank has assisted 509 agricultural lessees in redemption cases. An actual consignment of P858,836.00 was made with the Court of Agrarian Relations."
"178","Twenty-one estates to be acquired are under registration and 172 agricultural estates have been referred for investigation by the field units of the Land Reform Project Administration."
"179","During the last session of Congress, I certified a bill authorizing the sale of military camps situated around Manila and suburbs to generate more funds for the Land Bank. Unfortunately, it did not pass. I reiterate its importance here and ask anew that it be passed this year."
"180","We intend, within the next four years, to place the entire country under leasehold, thereby completely terminating the share-crop tenancy system. We must look for ways and means, amending the code if necessary, to hasten the implementation of land reform by simplifying prescribed procedures in preparing areas for leasehold proclamation. One method will be to expedite the land capability and classification survey so as to determine feasible lease rentals based on land capability."
"181","We shall embark on a larger land acquisition program under the Land Authority and the Land Bank in order that the establishment of family-owned farms can be realized. To encourage the landowners to offer their landholdings for sale, it is necessary to increase the ceiling of cash payment from its present level."
"182","There is need for legislation to permit the Land Bank to determine the interest rates of the bonds and to widen and enlarge their uses."
"183","In terms of government-sponsored self-help projects, our rural communities, with the aid of local governments and private institutions, implemented a total of 203,260 self-help project worth P59,477,323.63 in terms of cash, materials, labor, and project sites. The degree of participation on the part of the private sector is evident from the fact that for every peso spent by the government, the beneficiaries contributed P2.69"
"184","Finally, in the training of the barrio folk development work during the four-year period under review, we were able to organize and finish 177,006 training and information projects involving 13,141,172 participants with a total cost of P24,073,123.94. Of this amount, the government shouldered P800,378.29, or less than three-and-a-half percent of the total cost; the substantial part of the fund was borne by the barrio folk."
"185","All this is evidence of the success of our community development program. This further reinforces our belief that our total socioeconomic program for the nation should be complemented by a program to develop our communities, such as we have done during the past four years."
"186","Particularly during the past four years under an enlightened administration, the CNI has brought about the gradual uplift of the more than 47 known ethnic groups, from the Apayaos in the north to the Badjaos in the south."
"187","This uplift has been brought about through education, legal assistance, social and administrative aid, settlement aids, and accelerated research and public information programs."
"188","In 1969, the CNI’s scholar program reached a new high. A record P3.5 million was appropriated for scholarships to deserving members of the cultural minorities throughout the islands."
"189","The new scholarship policy is in line with the administration’s socioeconomic goals. More emphasis was laid on technical-vocational courses."
"190","In the legal field, the CNI’s lawyers answered the call particularly of the impoverished minorities. CNI legal personnel went to different parts of the country to handle landgrabbing cases for the minorities and prepared the ground for the proclamation of reserved areas as cultural minorities’ settlements."
"191","To enable cultural minority provinces and municipalities to improve their services for the minorities, this year the CNI released a total of P100,000.00 for social development and P62,500.00 as administrative aid."
"192","Seven settlements were in actual operation in 1969. A skeleton force of fieldsmen in six regional offices looked after the minorities’ needs in the rural areas. Basic farm assistance was given to settlers including the assignment of a farm manager to each settlement."
"193","In some cases, however, unplanned growth has resulted in the creeping disease of urban blight. Cities outgrow themselves without realizing it. Inadequate sanitation facilities, shortage of social services, lack of housing resulting in the growth of slums, excessive speculation in land, lack of public transportation coupled with inadequate streets, pollution of the atmosphere—these are some of the symptoms of the progressive disease known as urban blight."
"194","Part of this is due to great population pressure brought about by internal migration. In turn, the migration pattern is set by the undue economic expectations raised by the cities."
"195","The problem is how to maintain the economic viability of the urban areas while averting blight. For blight is not merely a physical condition; it gives birth to social disorders arising from the failure to satisfy the basic needs of the poor."
"196","Traditionally, the solution is decentralization of industries, the creation of other centers as magnets for internal migrants. This, I propose to do. Studies are in progress for the establishment of industrial estates which will form the nuclei of new urban areas."
"197","Such a solution takes time, however; in the meantime, the urgent need is for the provision of housing, alternatively, the relocation of squatters. The success of the Sapang Palay experiment indicates that relocation, when undertaken in a suitable area and when accompanied by a program of community development, offers a practical solution."
"198","For a variety of reasons, however, low-cost housing in urban areas is a more attractive proposition. In 1966, I ordered a thorough study of the housing needs of the country. This resulted in the establishment of the National Housing Corporation, which began operations last year."
"199","The NHC is a pioneering project but its very success emphasizes the dimension of the housing problem of the country. The majority of Filipino families belong to the low- and middle-income groups. The housing needs of the country are estimated at 470,000 units annually for the next 20 years. As against this estimate, the NHC can build only 12,000 units per year. In time, the corporation expects to increase its output but nowhere near the amount needed to absorb all the estimated housing needs."
"200","It is clear that other avenues must be explored to solve a problem of increasing urgency. I propose to tap other resources to augment the efforts of the NHC, but in the long run, I believe that private enterprise should help and recognize the housing problem not only as an investment challenge but as a challenge in civic awareness."
"201","Our science development program emphasizes the upgrading of science teachers, the improvement of science curricula, the provision on teaching equipment, the modernization of laboratory facilities and research in science teaching. Under the teacher-training institutes, a total of 2,354 were trained. We also obtained 100 Leybold Physics equipment through the German technical assistance for the use of the Philippine science high schools."
"202","Three agencies—the Philippine Coconut Research Institute, the Philippine Textile Research Institute, and the Philippine Inventors Commission—were added to the NSDB."
"203","The Philippine Coconut Research Institute is the first step towards the modernization of the coconut industry now facing problems in research and production, processing, marketing, fertilizers and pesticides, training and organization of farmers’ cooperatives, and financing."
"204","The Philippine Textile Research Institute was established by the NSDB in January, 1967, in recognition of the sad plight of the local textile industry. Under Republic Act 4086, textile millers are given tax exemptions for the importation of raw materials, chemicals, and spare parts for equipment. In lieu of taxes and duties, the textile millers pay 1% of their gross sales, which becomes part of the Special Textile Research Fund."
"205","We reactivated the Philippine Inventors Commission on May 8, 1967, to encourage local inventors develop machines useful for our economic development. We plan to establish creative societies in our schools to promote inventiveness among the youth."
"206","The uses of atomic energy for economic development will continue to be explored by the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission of the NSDB. During the last four years, a total of 57 research projects were completed in the following fields: agriculture, biology, medicine, engineering and industry, and the physical sciences. We have also assisted 107 institutions in launching or undertaking nuclear energy work. Seventy-six scientists were sent abroad to study nuclear science and technology; and 482 scientists, medical doctors, engineers, and technicians were provided basic training in the use of nuclear techniques through the commission’s local training courses."
"207","These are the gains and expectations. With the new competence and the new faith in ourselves that have developed through the past four years, we cannot fail."
"208","Indeed, we cannot afford to fail. For we are faced with a grave and persistent problem which, unsolved, will wipe out all our gains and destroy the promise of abundance and stability. This is the population problem."
"209","We are faced by a population crisis. It is time that we became aware of it. Much more important, it is time that we began to take steps to arrest a population growth which, unless checked, threatens to compound our problems in the years ahead."
"210","The Philippines has an average population of 3.5%, one of the highest in the world. At that rate, the present population estimated at 37 million will have increased to 45 million in 1975—just five years from today—and to 53 million by the end of the decade."
"211","There is nothing inherently wrong in rapid population growth. The problem is to increase the rate of national growth over and above population growth. But to suppose that this can easily be done is, to be frank, a dangerous illusion."
"212","This emphasizes the importance of measures for the control of population."
"213","With a soaring birth rate, the prospects for a continued economic development are considerably diminished. Indeed, there is a strong possibility that the gains which we have carefully built up over the years may be cancelled by a continuing population explosion."
"214","Assuming that there will be no decline in the birth rate, the critical areas will be the supply of food, employment, and education. Just to maintain present standards, the Philippines will need, during the decade, a 40% increase in food production and similar percentage increases in schools and job opportunities."
"215","The financial outlay required for these heavy investments, not to speak of equally heavy investments in expanded social and allied services, will inevitably eat away the total capital needed for development."
"216","I do not share the doomsday accent of the prophets of disaster, but I cannot anticipate this prospect with equanimity. My first act therefore after the elections was to convene a council on population to prepare studies on which population policy can be based."
"217","After a careful weighing of factors, I have decided to propose legislation making family planning an official policy of my administration."
"218","The task of government in the control of population is threefold."
"219","The first is education, in order to impress on the people the urgent need for controlling the population."
"220","The second is the dissemination of knowledge on the techniques of birth control sanctioned by scientific and medical practice."
"221","The third is the provision of facilities, especially in the rural areas, where assistance in the use of birth control methods may be extended to the poor."
"222","These will be included in the proposed family planning law."
"223","I am aware of the important role of private initiative in spreading knowledge about family planning. In particular, the mass media have been extremely helpful in pointing out the dangers of the population explosion. I urge them to continue to do so."
"224","The meaning of the population explosion is human misery—a deprivation of the basic necessities for sheer physical survival. This is the rightful concern of the Church, for above all else, it is committed to man as man; anything that diminishes him diminishes all humanity."
"225","I therefore invite the Church to join in a common enterprise to alleviate suffering—to help, just as its sister Churches have helped in many lands where the population explosion is a persistent, an urgent, and above all an intensely human problem."
"226","For the first time, we reelected an incumbent president. We thus shed the wasteful habit of trusting in palliatives in favor of long-range planning and steady, disciplined implementation."
"227","We have geared our foreign policy to the day when we will have to look after our own national security. We have shown that we are politically mature and diplomatically responsible. We have not allowed our differences with Malaysia on Sabah to hamper the more important goal of unifying our part of Southeast Asia for mutual growth and security."
"228","From foreign and trade relations exclusively with “safe” countries, we are moving towards cultural, economic, and diplomatic ties with countries of diverse political persuasions."
"229","The keynote of our foreign policy is self-reliance and independence; the method, flexibility in the pursuit of national objectives; the watch word, nationalism."
"230","Foreign policy does not operate in a vacuum. It operates in a world which resounds with the clash of national interest. For the Philippines, as for any other nation, the objective is to discover among a diversity of purposes a community of interest with other countries which can be pursued for the common benefit."
"231","Thus the need for flexibility. As overdependence on any one country restricts freedom of action, so in reverse does a widening of relations in the international field open a whole new world of opportunities."
"232","This reorientation is, first of all, a recognition of the changed character of the world in which we live, and secondly, a response to the increasingly nationalistic aspirations of the Filipino people."
"233","Foreign policy in previous years had, perhaps unavoidably, marked colonial characteristics. It had ceased to be a useful tool for enhancing the national interest. The new requirements of the Filipino people brought about by changing conditions here and abroad made it imperative that we reexamine outmoded assumptions. Accordingly, I directed the Department of Foreign Affairs to undertake a study in scale for redirecting the main thrusts of our foreign policy and to prepare the means, by which a new forward-looking foreign policy could be implemented."
"234","The burden of the new foreign policy is as follows:"
"235","While the menace of nuclear war has receded to a certain degree, the problems which have replaced it are equally urgent. Not less than total and annihilating war, the issues revolve and touch upon the ability to survive the perils of the Third World, of which the Philippines is a part."
"236","The threat of escalating poverty in three-quarters of the world, the mounting population pressure, the overincreasing disparity between the rich and the relatively poor countries—the ramifying problems draw upon our reserves of will and purpose in order to survive and, hopefully, to flourish in the critical seventies. The desire and willingness for political accommodations must be matched by a similar desire and willingness for economic accommodations."
"237","These problems cannot be solved by individual countries; they must be solved in common. To this task, we, friends and foes alike, must address ourselves."
"238","In our region of the world, there have been two encouraging developments. The first is the de-escalation of the Vietnam War, and the second is the emergence of the ASEAN as a positive factor in the enhancement of regional cooperation in Southeast Asia."
"239","Regarding Vietnam, we are still in the proverbial tunnel. But the de-escalation has at the very least a symbolic value, namely, that a will exists to find the means for ending a fruitless war which has sharpened political divisions all over the world and added needless strain on the precarious stability of Southeast Asia. We continue to hope for the best while being prepared at all times to contribute to the further easing of tensions which could lead to the ending of the war."
"240","Last December, I ordered the PHILCAG home after humanitarian service in Vietnam. Its record is unstained; its reputation amongst the people it helped at the highest. I recalled the PHILCAG because the funds for its maintenance have run out and because it is needed for similar humanitarian service in Central Luzon. Unfortunately, its return was marred by a controversy which imputed unworthy motives to our government."
"241","I repeat that the PHILCAG went to Vietnam for no other reason than the desire to help a friendly people in distress. Under normal circumstances, the PHILCAG’s assistance would have been viewed with gratitude. But we seem to have been caught in the midst of a bitter internal debate, a bystander dragged into the dirt by combatants too intent on winning a verbal brawl to notice that innocent parties have been hurt."
"242","But I, and still less the PHILCAG, do not ask for the gratitude of the United States Congress or of certain senators. It is enough that peasants in the hills of Vietnam looked upon the PHILCAG as a friendly presence, as a helping hand extended in a time of need."
"243","The last ministerial meeting of the ASEAN should be regarded as a breakthrough stage in the short life of the ASEAN. For the first time since its founding, a map of wide-ranging though modest projects has been drawn. Depending on our capability to implement them, the succeeding years will indicate whether Southeast Asia is at last ready for the novel experiment of regional cooperation. All the signs are hopeful and we feel it must succeed."
"244","The projected withdrawal of the United Kingdom from Southeast Asia coupled with the announced policy of United States military retrenchment in the region after the Vietnam War have added a new dimension to the ASEAN. Interest has been expressed in certain quarters about the possibility of using the ASEAN as the nucleus of a possible indigenous security system."
"245","Such a plan is quite clearly not feasible at this stage. At the same time we should be receptive, while remaining uncommitted, to the merits of a regional security system committed to the defense of the region. Clearly, such a defense system will have limited objectives, and the basis of cooperation may not even be military in the sense that it is usually understood. The necessary task of clarification of objectives, capabilities, and procedures precedes all, and to this at least we must he prepared to contribute."
"246","The normalization of relations with Malaysia added point to the desire to make ASEAN a going concern. In itself, however, the resumption of diplomatic relations with Malaysia is desirable. It removes a source of unnecessary tension in Southeast Asia while permitting countries to pursue the solution of bilateral problem to the benefit of both, among them the antismuggling agreement."
"247","As for the Sabah problem, it is our expressed desire and intention to settle it by peaceful means in consonance with the philosophy of our Constitution and by our commitment to the United Nations Charter. By agreement with the government of Malaysia, the normalization of relations was reached without preconditions, on their part or ours."
"248","In accordance with the broad policy guidelines set forth above, I hope to finalize the plans for the approaching negotiations with the United States on the revision of the Military Bases Agreement, the Military Assistance Pact, the Mutual Defense Treaty, and the Laurel-Langley Agreement."
"249","The implementation of agreements reached with other member-countries in the ASEAN will necessarily take precedence in our efforts to strengthen regional collaboration. This year, the Philippines will play host to the fourth ministerial meeting of the organization, and it is my hope that a food development program which has already been agreed upon in principle, will begin to take final shape."
"250","Consistent with our desire to widen relationships with other countries, I have directed the Department of Foreign Affairs to study the possibility of seeking an associate membership in the European Economic Community. With the establishment of diplomatic relations with Venezuela last year, we are in a position to launch a new campaign for stronger political and cultural ties with the Latin American countries."
"251","With the exception of Nigeria and the Republic of Lesotho, with which we established diplomatic relations last year, Africa south of the Sahara is for all practical purposes a virgin territory to us. We propose to remedy this oversight, for we cannot long remain isolated from a huge region which shares common problems of growth and development with us. I asked the Department of Foreign Affairs to prepare plans for a program of technical assistance to countries in Black Africa which may have need of this form of assistance."
"252","The establishment of viable relationships with countries of Eastern Europe will continue to be an important objective of our foreign policy. Studies are being conducted by the appropriate government agencies, and the private economic sector has been requested to contribute its own information and plans."
"253","As an original member of the United Nations, we take a deep interest in the continued viability of the world organization. It is still true that for most of the countries of the world, especially the developing countries, the United Nations is a Court of Last Resort. We shall continue to need it, more especially in the dangerous years ahead."
"254","It is my feeling, however, that the functioning of the United Nations, with a membership nearly three times its original membership and saddled with problems not envisioned in 1945, could be improved, possibly by a revision of its Charter. Accordingly, the Philippines proposed the inclusion in the agenda for the coming UN session of an item calling for a review of the Charter, with an eye towards strengthening its peacekeeping functions and facilitating the formulation of a worldwide strategy for development."
"255","As regards the Sabah problem, studies are in progress on how the conflict between Malaysia and the Philippines may be successfully resolved in the context of previous agreements. Although the formula is elusive, there is no reason to fear that the issue will remain in permanent deadlock. In the spirit of the new friendship between Malaysia and the Philippines, I continue to hope that the two countries can, in cooperation rather than as adversaries, find a solution to an intractable problem."
"256","The next few years will lay the basis for a reformation—a revolutionary reformation of our political, social, legal, and economic systems. The coming Constitutional Convention in 1971 will play a singular role in this task of reformation. We must see to it that the 1971 Constitution must be truly the expression of a free and sovereign people and will embody the ideals of Philippine nationalism, social justice, and economic progress. The 1971 Constitution must not seek to perpetuate the inequities of the status quo."
"257","It is imperative, therefore, that the delegates to the 1971 Constitutional Convention represent the widest range possible of the various sectors of our society."
"258","One of the major sources of public disenchantment with the political system has been the electoral process. With its familiar spectacles of violence, coercion, and fraud, and its general inability to support the aspirations of our people, the present electoral process has been the object of popular disdain through demonstrations and rallies. Under the present system, it has become almost axiomatic that a poor man will not win in an election. With increasing frequency, public office is despoiled by men whose inclination to abuse and excess is demonstrated and sharpened at our polling places."
"259","At the same time, however, we must not overlook the requirements of self-defense in case of aggression."
"260","In the context of new realities which loom large in the decade of the seventies, no less than a self-reliant policy can bring about a viable defense posture for the country. Pending resolution of our bilateral treaties in the economic and military fields, steps have been taken by the defense establishment to produce its own arms and munitions at the least cost to the economy."
"261","A restructuring of our armed services with an acceptable balance of foreign equipment support and locally produced items will be the principal focus of programming our defense requirements. In optimizing our defense posture to enhance our security in the face of competing objectives, the priorities in allocating resources in the Armed Forces will take into account the impact of military programs on our national development goals and objectives."
"262","The defense establishment will play an important role in artificial rain stimulation and typhoon control and dissipation. This vital task to be undertaken by our Air Force in cooperation with the United States Air Force holds exciting possibilities and its importance is underscored by the fact that our total losses due to drought and typhoons last year amounted to P315 million, roughly equivalent to our present balance of payments difficulties. These are severe constraints on our development as a nation and if the Armed Forces, through this imaginative use of its resources, can only reduce such staggering losses even by 10%, they would, with this single measure, greatly improve our export posture and correct our foreign exchange deficiencies."
"263","In the field of purely military undertakings, various alternatives for the development of effective internal security forces will be continually examined with the view of modernizing our command and control system and realigning cost ratios of personnel services to logistics. This concept is essential to the attainment of a self-reliant posture in the development of a logistics base."
"264","I am aware, however, that there will be 1,500 officers and enlisted men of the Armed Forces who will be retiring within the next two years. This fact brings out the need to provide funds for AFP retirement benefits which have been building up throughout all these years. For this fiscal year alone, the AFP will need an outlay of P65 million to support its pension fund requirement. I therefore reiterate my proposal to sell selected military reservations, a portion of the proceeds of which will be used to fund the retirement of said personnel in conjunction with another proposal for AFP personnel themselves to contribute to their retirement fund. This retirement, which will include the top hierarchy in the AFP, will also necessitate the projection of a new leadership in the Armed Forces. I am confident that the emergent leaders in the AFP are quite ready and qualified to take over since they have the academic preparation; they have been battle-tested in the Huk and Sulu campaigns, in Korea, and in Vietnam; they understand our close ties with the Western world but are also aware of our Asian ties, and they are attuned to the dynamics of change and our posture of nationalism and self-reliance."
"265","In regard to our efforts in Central Luzon, military operations there will continue to be supportive in nature and only to the extent that threats to peace and tranquility are beyond the capacity of local government officials to effectively stop and prevent. The PHILCAG has recently been deployed to Central Luzon in fulfillment of our commitment to alleviate conditions in that area in collaboration with other agencies. It is not my intention to keep PHILCAG on a permanent basis in Central Luzon. It is my hope that the civilian institutions—both public and private—which should be performing the tasks assigned to PHILCAG can eventually assume the responsibilities for these developmental tasks which properly belong to them. If we are to keep democracy alive in this country, there is no alternative but to strengthen these civilian institutions—including the local police forces. I would like to see the day when our people can look up our local police forces with full confidence in their integrity and capability to carry out their peacekeeping responsibilities."
"266","The development of a self-reliant defense posture stems from internal development through rational application of resources. In this direction, the defense establishment will continue to do its share in providing for whatever contingencies that may threaten internal peace and security."
"267","The reorganization panels have proposed organizational changes which are responsive to the need for more efficient, economical, and effective administration. They have not lost sight, however, of the requirements of accelerated social and economic development, as the administration envisions."
"268","The proposals for reorganizing government offices along those lines will be submitted to Congress as soon as possible."
"269","We have found that “special relations” are not satisfactory. We therefore seek full recognition of our sovereignty and full development of economic independence. We will not tolerate economic ties that will diminish our natural right of self-determination and self-government."
"270","In the coming Laurel-Langley negotiations, we will protect our sovereignty, our rights of jurisdiction, and our self-respect as a mature independent nation."
"271","In recent years, we have seen nationalism develop into a positive and constructive force. Along with it has grown greater confidence among our people, based on their increasing ability to decide their own destiny."
"272","This is fortunate. For it is imperative that when we revise our Constitution, we shall do so with a full knowledge of our capabilities for sustained and self-reliant national growth, as well as of our ability to transcend political and other differences in order to work as one towards national objectives. This unity of purpose and action will require a stern will and a limitless capacity for endurance and sacrifice."
"273","The time to begin developing this determination and strength is now. The discipline which we will need to achieve our goals must be tested from now on against the nation’s numerous and varied problems."
"274","As a complementary measure, incentives should also be given to the tourist industry because this will provide us with valuable foreign exchange."
"275","I am proposing that an enabling act be passed to create an Export Guarantee Corporation. This corporation will guarantee our own businessmen against price fluctuations and credit risks. I wish to emphasize the importance of an integrated incentives program for the development of our export industries."
"276","It is my hope that in this session, Congress will review the necessity of the subsidies especially the gold subsidy. Even under existing law, by-product producers of gold should be excluded from these subsidies."
"277","It might be good to mention now that a Land Policy Council should be set up. This council should decide our land use pattern. It should be the responsibility of the council to determine whether a piece of land should remain forestry land, or reserved for raining, or converted to agricultural or residential land. I suggest that we pattern our land use policies after Great Britain’s."
"278","In these critical times, the main argument for this partnership is the uncertainty of this new decade, which poses extreme and uncommon perils, even while it holds out bright prospects. Thrust into the full harshness of modernity, without having realized our full economic potential, we must bear the problems and satisfy the needs of an advanced industrial state with the scant resources, facilities, and skills of a developing one. Our needs are not always in proportion to either our status or our capacities; our wants are not always justified by either of them."
"279","Our people are haunted, if not altogether oppressed, by the conviction that they must share all the luxuries and comforts of the powerful industrial states; their appetites are whetted, their expectations increased, by the awesome advance which science and technology enable those other societies to achieve; and they feel themselves unjustly deprived and injured to have to do without the privileges and conveniences that other nations have."
"280","In speaking of progress, they are compelled more and more to deal not in terms of their own particular development, but rather in the challenging terms of the risen technological and industrial classes who set the standards of growth and level of expectation for mankind all over the world."
"281","This, ladies and gentlemen of the Seventh Congress, is our circumstance at the beginning of this critical decade."
"282","In my second inaugural address, I pledged that the Presidency shall provide moral leadership, to change those attitudes and tastes that mock our aspirations and our capacities. I renew this pledge now; with an invitation to Congress that its members join me in setting the proper example of leadership, by passing legislation that will complement the moral influence of government."
"283","I leave it to Congress to determine how it will share this new ethical burden; for I dare not prescribe the required measure of dedication or commitment to this cause. But I issue the challenge to Congress."
"284","Time has brought us into the threshold of the seventies, But, by crossing the frontier I had spoken of in my last message, we have brought ourselves into the threshold of a new world."
"285","For the Filipino people, it is a world of peril and opportunity."
"286","We shall be in peril of losing our gains through fear and inaction. We face the danger that greed will vanquish the conscience of the rich. The pitfalls of disunity lie in our path. There is the ever-present danger that the courageous vision which enabled us to advance in the past four years will be overwhelmed by cynicism and hypocrisy. We begin life in the seventies wracked by growing pains. Timidity, conservatism, the impulse to resist change stand in the way, ready to thwart our advance."
"287","Let us all resolve to conquer these perils. Beyond them, prosperity and lasting peace wait to reward the nation. But prosperity will always be out of reach, lasting peace will forever be a chimera, if our desire for them does not become a passion and our labors to make them possible are confined to trickles and spurts."
"288","It is not an easy triumph that we want. In the past four years, when our purpose was to shake ourselves free from inertia, we had to strain our hearts and limbs in the unusual exertions of will and work to fulfill our aim."
"289","In the process, we learned the lesson that must attend our present tasks. Today, we are animated by the aim of sustained national growth, and willpower must be built into the character of the nation as an enduring and indispensable discipline."
"290","Discipline will move us, surely and steadily, into the future. It is the fount from which purposefulness and unity spring. In the coming years, we will need increasing courage and perseverance, a greater capacity for sacrifice, larger nobility, a stronger resistance to the temptations of sloth and personal fortune. We can equip ourselves with these only if we begin now to build the strength of character that comes from the discipline of hard work and unswerving purpose."
"291","I am confident that our people, to the last man, have it in themselves to meet the challenges, the duties and perils that we face. But we must together, citizen and leader at the same time, exert a conscious effort to increase and perfect the Filipino potential into a powerful force in active confrontation with life."
"292","We have indeed begun our task. We must continue and we must persevere."
"293","I thank you."
