"","x"
"1","“New Filipinism: The Turning Point”"
"2","Twelve months ago, I rendered to you and to the people an account of how we began to translate the Filipino dream of national greatness into reality. The central theme of that report was the achieving spirit that animated the vigorous partnership between the government and the people. Today, I ask you to witness with me the metamorphosis which the new achieving spirit of the Filipino people has brought about."
"3","This transformation is essentially spiritual."
"4","It is a prophecy come true."
"5","In the 1890s Rizal saw the rise of “new men” and a “new social order” within a century. In 1968, the New Filipino and the New Filipinism came into being."
"6","I ask you to ponder this vital new force in the life of the Filipino people in relation to the pattern of national development since the 1900s."
"7","The ancient character of our economic life persisted even beyond the grant of Philippine independence in 1946, attesting to the feeble and unsuccessful efforts to change what has always been the root of our economic maladies—the inequitable distribution of land. Excessive land holdings concentrated in a few families, on the one hand, and conditions of want and tenancy approaching slavery, on the other, comprised an economic structure that had to be, but never was, altered. This, together with the colonial status of our economy from 1900, consigned the Filipino people to a remarkably long experience of economic backwardness."
"8","This condition is summarized by an American observer, who said: “…as it gained political independence, the Philippine Republic was still far from possessing economic sovereignty. The United States, on the other hand, retained some of the economic and military advantages of a colonial power while it was relieved of the burden of administration and of direct responsibility for Philippine welfare.”"
"9","In the postindependence years, there were no important changes. Although the requirements of an expanding economy were appreciated after the wholesale pillage and devastation of the last war, the nation continued to make little progress away from its old patterns of land tenure, production, and foreign trade. The inertia of dependence may be best dramatized by the steadily increasing importation of rice which the Philippine government had to make from year to year, culminating in the unbelievable P264-million purchase in 1965."
"10","Industrial growth was at first limited to the advantage of alien interests that were determined to keep the Philippines within the bounds of a limited agricultural economy; and then subsequently set on an erratic course by half-hearted efforts. By 1965, some industrial activity had been induced; but because of the catastrophic mismanagement of the national economy, 1,400 corporations were dead or dying or in dire need of massive government aid before the year was over."
"11","The crime and disorder of the postwar years aggravated these conditions. These words of another American observer describe the chaos of the liberation years: “At the end of the war it was difficult to restore law and order and to preserve and foster democratic processes. Manuel Quezon was missed. . . . The primordial struggle for existence gave a degree of lawlessness and criminality to practically every province and section of the country. Robberies, kidnappings, and daylight assaults on buses, trucks and trains were almost daily occurrences. The traditional respect for individual freedom and human rights was insufficient to counteract the petty criminals, the bandits, and the Communist-led groups who debauched the cities and disturbed the countryside.”"
"12","The inefficiency and the immorality in government are partly due to this defective political system. What is more, this political system has obstructed the democratic process. The system also has ironically been the chief obstacle to our progress. The sad truth is that we have kept our faith in democracy despite the inadequacies of our democratic institutions."
"13","Excessive partisan politics is responsible for the abuse of democratic principles in this country, and for the consequent inability of certain sectors of society to apply themselves with dedication and vigor to the advancement of the nation. There is an urgent need to curb the selfish and callous tendency of some of our leading citizens to engage in political activity at the expense of the public good."
"14","It is for the purpose of answering this need that Republic Act 4880 was passed by Congress and approved by me on June 17, 1967. The provisions of this law are clear: “It shall be unlawful for any political party, political committee, or political group to nominate candidates for any elective public office voted for at large earlier than one hundred and fifty days immediately preceding an election, and for any other elective public office earlier than ninety days immediately preceding an election.”"
"15","And again: “It is unlawful for any person whether or not a voter or candidate, or for any group or association of persons, whether or not a political party or political committee, to engage in an election campaign or partisan political activity except during the period of one hundred twenty days immediately preceding an election involving a public office voted for at large and ninety days immediately preceding an election for any other elective public office.”"
"16","It is my hope, and undoubtedly yours too, that this lawful and necessary injunction is obeyed, this year and every election year hereafter, so that we may with the resulting harmony and cooperation, more speedily perform the common responsibility of nation-building."
"17","It is fortunate that the nation will, just two years from now, call a constitutional convention. I leave it to the delegates of that convention to evolve a truly democratic system, one which will not merely bend, as our system does today, to the wishes of a traditional elite and perpetuate the status quo. Democratic institutions must be instruments of national advancement. Democracy must symbolize change."
"18","In short, our goal is nothing less than the complete transformation of our social, economic, and political milieu, the reorientation of our people’s idea of themselves and of their capability, and the complete change of the assumptions that govern our relations with other nations."
"19","This is the New Filipinism. This is the turning point."
"20","This emphasis made its greatest impact on infrastructure development, food production, foreign relations, government reforms, labor and social services, trade and industry, and community development."
"21","In specific terms, how did we implement the national desire for basic and far-reaching economic and social change?"
"22","All these developments have been set in motion because of this administration’s deep and abiding concern for the welfare of the great mass of the downtrodden and underprivileged. We must as quickly as possible rescue millions of our countrymen from the poverty and deprivation in which they have lived all their lives."
"23","This is the immediate aim of all our endeavors."
"24","The thrust to full development is unmistakable in every field. I sincerely believe that, with the continuing support of our people, the breakthroughs and innovations of the past year will, before long, establish a momentum which neither future negligence nor design can easily diminish or destroy."
"25","Many more aims, however, remain to be fulfilled by that partnership with government which, imbued with the New Filipinism, has brought us to this historic turning point. Our production in agriculture and industry must continue to expand. We must not forfeit the new vitality in the nation’s life by another lapse into in action and indifference. We must further increase the national rate of growth."
"26","On this score, our country had a significant year. Prices, as reflected in the Consumer Price Index for Manila, were literally held to a standstill. The CPI Manila level for 1968 was exactly equal to that of 1967. Consumer Price Index for the whole Philippines showed the same stability, registering only a 0.7% increase over 1967."
"27","According to the Economic Monitor, December 23, 1968: “In terms of prices, this year might yet rum out to be the most stable. For one, the consumer price index for Manila has not shown any appreciable change since January of the current year, increasing from 152.7 to only 154.2 last month or a minuscule 1.5 percentage points rise registered for the same period last year. “"
"28","“This relative stability of the general price level is apparently the offshoot of the success of the Administration’s agricultural food production program notably in cereals. Meat and fish output were also reported to have gone up. All these factors are reflected in the small increase in the price index of food of only 2.8 percentage points, from 179.4 to 181.5. “"
"29","Last year, we expanded not only our economic but also our political horizons. It is probable that future historians will consider the political redirection more important than the economic gains."
"30","These countries have many things to offer the Philippines in terms of technical knowledge and trade opportunities."
"31","Foremost is the national interest. Our foreign policy is always governed by our unswerving commitment to the welfare and dignity of the Philippines, by the need to protect our independence, territorial dignity, and national dignity."
"32","In protecting and promoting the national welfare, we have at the same time strengthened our links with Asia."
"33","Considerations of the nation’s welfare also compel us to establish strong safeguards against the threat of communist aggression, infiltration, and subversion. At the same time, we have an open mind concerning relations with Socialist countries, particularly those of Eastern Europe."
"34","We are firm in our belief in the rule of law. We have a rich tradition of freedom and civil liberties. Our foreign policy will uphold this tradition."
"35","We have always supported the United Nations. We believe in viable and mutually advantageous regional defense arrangements."
"36","Peace and security are inseparable. We believe that progress in Asia is the common concern of the countries of the region. Their cooperation for prosperity and stability is possible only in a period of peace."
"37","Finally, we are resolute about accelerating economic development. We aim to overcome poverty not only in the Philippines but in the other countries of Asia as well."
"38","What will be the contours of this world?"
"39","The time has come for us to start looking out for ourselves, because no one else will. There is now an urgent need to modify our defense and foreign policies in order to make them hew closer to the national interest."
"40","To prepare our country for this new world we formulated last year the following guidelines."
"41","We enter this difficult world with one important advantage: our breakthrough in agricultural production. Freed from the problem of feeding our people, we can concentrate more of our resources on industrializing our economy and on making our boundaries secure."
"42","This does not mean that this will be the permanent pattern of our economy. Simultaneously with the increase in the productivity and efficiency of agriculture and as soon as we have the capital resources and technology for industrialization, we will move on without hesitation to the industrial stage because industry is the only sure and lasting foundation of a strong, modern state."
"43","I want the private sector to utilize our economic resources efficiently. There have been too many cases of wasteful duplication and the building up of unnecessary capacity. I now ask private businessmen to consider more carefully the needs of their industry and their country as well as their own enterprises; and I have required government financial institutions to be stricter in their evaluation of applications for government support."
"44","The deficits resulted principally from the country’s impatience to grow. Close to three-fourths of total imports during the last two years were of essential and semiessential producers’ goods, the demand for which arose from the combined investment programs of the private sector and the government. An additional one-tenth of our imports was in the form of essential consumer goods. Maturities of international obligations incurred in the past also contributed significantly to our balance of payments burdens. It appears that these pressures on our external position have been the cause of certain misgivings on the part of the business community over the future prospects of domestic credit, the exchange rate, and the international reserve. Indeed, the large volume of imports during the last two years partly reflect the efforts of traders and manufacturers to build up inventories in anticipation of adverse movements in the exchange rate or in fear of possible exchange controls."
"45","I wish to state in the strongest terms that there is no basis for these fears. The country’s balance of payments problems are well within manageable bounds and can be handled without resorting to further credit restrictions, exchange controls, or devaluation."
"46","Also, I am asking the Monetary Board to look into the possibility of implementing some suggested measures to be undertaken during the coming months to alleviate the pressures on the international reserve."
"47","These measures t0 avail of import credits are intended to minimize immediate drains on the reserves rather than to encourage larger volumes of imports at this time. The amount of total imports will still be subject to judicious moderation, both by monetary policy instruments and by fiscal restraint."
"48","I ask those foreign enterprises which avail themselves of domestic credit facilities to finance their remittances abroad to refrain from making any remittances for the remainder of this year. I ask those enterprises which do not use domestic credit facilities to reduce their remittances in 1969 by 50%."
"49","The investment priorities plan will give some idea of the likely new products that can be developed for export. As for market opportunities, one of the most interesting results of our missions to the Socialist countries was the list they brought back of the commodities we could export to the Socialist countries together with the prices that these commodities may be expected to fetch. This list, which has been widely publicized, has undoubtedly already attracted the interest of many of our businessmen. It shows that there is a wide range of commodities in providing which we can undersell the present suppliers to the Socialist countries by margins ranging from 10% to 70%. Some of these commodities, moreover, are traditional exports for which the regular markets are static or contracting or commodities of which there is chronic domestic overproduction."
"50","The conditions under which sales to Socialist countries will be made seem satisfactory. Best of all, the Socialist countries seem to have a much more positive view of trade with developing countries than do their Western counterparts. Socialist imports from the developing countries have continually increased at a faster rate than their total foreign trade; and this seems to be their deliberate national policy. The reasons behind this policy are obvious, but there is no harm in our taking advantage of it if adequate safeguards are taken. Almost all of our Southeast Asian neighbors have been doing so for several years, and have generally benefited."
"51","The Investment Incentives Act which Congress enacted in 1967 was designed to encourage the private sector to generate the capital for investment in new areas. The large number of applications for registration under the act by enterprises seeking to enter these high-priority fields is a convincing indication of the effectiveness of the act in stimulating private investments. I am confident that its operation will accelerate private investment efforts in the future as well as rationalize the country’s overall development pattern."
"52","The government, for its part, must keep pace with the country’s requirements by continuously implementing its own development projects and by providing adequate public and social services. Any shortcomings in the government’s efforts in these areas will pose serious obstacles to the country’s total development drive."
"53","This underscores the importance of new taxes. The need for more revenues is acute. It left us no choice but to ask, as I did, for new sources of income. We categorically reject inflation as a way of financing government development projects: The sources of funds must come from savings in the form of taxes."
"54","We should, however, spare the low-income group from any additional tax burdens. The burden of taxation must fall on those who can afford it. The price of progress must be paid primarily by the wealthy, rather than by the poor. Moreover, our efforts to increase tax revenues at home will increase our international credit standing. They are a dramatic indication to foreign lenders of long-term capital that we are prepared to make the necessary sacrifices to promote our economic development."
"55","Last year, nine tax measures were enacted into laws. These were among the principal recommendations embodied in the 1968 Tax Reform Program of my administration, which was drawn from the recommendations of the Joint Legislative Executive Tax Commission during this and the previous administration."
"56","Total revenue collections have increased from P1,869 million in Fiscal Year 1966 to P2,589 million in Fiscal Year 1968. The total collections of the BIR and the Bureau of Customs in the last three years covering the period 1966–1968 increased significantly over that of the previous three years (1963–1965). Overall rate of increase almost doubled from 9.5% to 18.2% for the two periods. The increase in internal revenue collections rose from 12% to 15.7%, and that of customs collections, a more impressive increase, from 2.5% to 25.9%."
"57","Along with the rise in revenue collections, the requirements of a growing economy for increased government facilities and services have also been increasing. In Fiscal Year 1969 alone, the total requirements of the national government amount to P3,450 million. However, the amount that can be generated to finance this requirement will only be P2,997 million, leaving a gross financial gap of P453 million. The magnitude of the problem is such that if we do not muster the required additional resources, we will not be able to meet our goals. Our goals are reflected in the growing demand for more schoolbuildings, housing, health, irrigation, power and water facilities, roads, communications, peace and order, and wage adjustments for government employees."
"58","I make a special appeal to Congress to enact the measures to enable the government to respond to these needs."
"59","The agreement of the International Monetary Fund was also obtained to increase the margin for Central Bank credit operations under the standby arrangements by P100 million expressly for the rice program. Significantly, despite the restrictive measures taken, economic development did not slow down. Production statistics continued to show improvements in agriculture and manufacturing."
"60","In line with this policy, a standby arrangement with the International Monetary Fund of P27.5 million was secured. Upon negotiation of this standby arrangement, the U.S. commercial banks agreed to convert $81.5 million of their $234.6 million short-term loans to the Central Bank into medium-term credit (four years). In the process, $24 million of Central Bank deposits which were pledged against the short-term loans were released by the commercial banks. In addition, the Central Bank obtained a $60-million credit line with various commercial banks, of which only $10 million has been availed of by the end of the year."
"61","The balance payments during the last quarter of 1968 resulted in a $25-million surplus after registering successive deficits in the four quarters ended July-September 1968 ranging from $14 million to $38 million in October-December 1967. The surplus arose from the reduction of the trade deficit from $81 million in the fourth quarter of 1967 to $61 million in October-December 1968 and the increase in the nontrade surplus from $44 million to $86 million, respectively. The leveling off of quarterly import payments, the gains inexpert and nontrade receipts, and the decrease in nontrade payments made the surplus possible."
"62","In the foreign exchange market, Central Bank intervention to stabilize the exchange rate declined from $669 million in 1967 to $395 million in 1968. Although the average selling and buying rates of commercial banks was higher in 1968 than in 1967, the interbank rate which averaged P3.917 in 1967 declined to P3.916 in 1968."
"63","Notwithstanding this event, the banking system continued to grow and to expand. During the first three quarters of 1968 alone, 29 branches of commercial banks, 2 new savings banks, and 4 branches of established savings banks were opened. Twenty-nine new rural banks and seven branches of development banks were established to service the rural areas."
"64","Internal and external monetary pressures are interrelated. Easing of pressure on our balance of payments results in the relaxation of internal credit; and the effect also works the other way around. If new sources of revenue are found, then the Central Bank within our covenants with IMF can ease the restrictions it now places on both public and private borrowing, and will be in a much better position to improve the structure of our external debt."
"65","The promulgation of Executive Order No. 97 on October 26, 1967, which created the Financial Policy Committee, finalized the creation of an overall body entrusted with the responsibility of planning and coordinating the financing operations of the national government and its instrumentalities. Currently, the committee is concerned with the servicing of the external debt of the Philippines and its restructuring. It is now necessary to restructure our external obligations in order to reduce the pressures on our foreign exchange reserves."
"66","Social development expenditures had always received the biggest cut from the government’s fund resources (44%), while the allotment for economic development was never below 17%. In the last year of the past administration, the allocation for social development was only 31% and for economic development, 11%. Certainly, previous allocations were too low for the present size of our population."
"67","On taxes, we submitted to you last year a program of proposed tax measures. Some of them you have passed; the others you have not. On borrowing, you gave me the additional authority and we have done the best we can to avail of loans to support our development program both in the public sector and in the private sector. But there are practical limitations that prevent a full utilization of our legal borrowing authority."
"68","Foreign loans usually require local currency counterparts. The generation of local currency on the other hand has to be done in such a manner as would not provoke inflation and balance of payments complications. We have also done much toward the development of a domestic government securities market, but this takes time and the absorptive capacity thus far developed is still insufficient."
"69","On greater efficiency in collections, the record of revenue collections in both the BIR and Customs during the past three years and the studies of your own as well as our Joint Legislative Executive Tax Commission can attest to the degree of effort we have exerted in this area. On savings, I have already instructed the Budget Commission to effect a reduction in the current year’s program of expenditures as well as to reduce by P200 million what had been originally programmed for FY 1969-1970. But we can go only so far in this area because we started in the first place with an attitude of spending only for the bare essentials. Our people rightly look up to us to provide them the services which they need. These consist of social overhead facilities or infrastructure as well as current services, such as those of education, health, and peace and order."
"70","We cannot, therefore, refuse to heed these demands on the grounds of inadequacy of existing funds."
"71","In only three years, the present administration finished 1,046 kilometers of concrete roads (or an increase of 105%); 1,502 kilometers of asphalt roads (a 20% increase); 5,694 kilometers of feeder roads (a 15% increase). We have also built 403 permanent national bridges with an aggregate length of 13,007 lineal meters (or an increase of 17%)."
"72","The previous administration, on the other hand, finished in four years only 70 kilometers of concrete roads, 458 kilometers of asphalt road, and 118 kilometers of feeder roads."
"73","A total of 287 national buildings and 73 hospitals and sanitaria have also been constructed."
"74","Still under construction are 19 irrigation systems and 28 commercial projects. Under study at the moment is the Upper Pampanga River Multipurpose Project, which will irrigate some 81,000 hectares in Nueva Ecija and supply power and water to Greater Manila. Through the National Irrigation Administration, we are developing eight pilot projects on water management in collaboration with experts commissioned by the Asian Development Bank."
"75","Apart from these projects of the Department of Public Works and Communications, the Armed Forces completed 227 irrigation projects in Central Luzon."
"76","In addition, through the combined efforts of the Bureau of Public Works and the Philippine Navy, we have dredged more than 36 million cubic meters of foreshore area at a cost of less than P1.00 a cubic meter, compared to previous costs which were as high as P5 a cubic meter."
"77","We have built or improved 22 airports, the more important of which were the Iloilo and Cotabato airports and the ManilaInternationalAirport’s terminal apron. The construction or improvement of 33 other airports is now under way."
"78","To stimulate taster growth in telecommunications, we allowed the private sector to participate more extensively in this industry. Early in 1966, we limited the Bureau of Telecommunications to the function of developing projects in areas where the potential traffic is inadequate, so that private enterprise may make reasonable profits. In less than three years, private telecommunications companies burgeoned and prospered. Last year, these companies invested an additional $8,263,300, nearly thrice more than their investments in 1966 which amounted to $3,977,100."
"79","The projected growth of the telecommunications industry is 10.5% a year. Our future program calls for an average yearly investment of $ 15,424,190. This annual additional investment will be provided mainly by the private sector."
"80","We are now working on still another program, which is to get all telecommunications companies, government and private, to enter into interconnecting agreements so that a subscriber of one system could easily be connected to a subscriber of another."
"81","Government itself, however, has been more active than at any other time in the past in developing telecommunications. Some of our more important projects are:"
"82","These do not include the massive expansion and upgrading work being done by the Armed Forces to improve their own telecommunications facilities. When I began my administration, the interservice communications system of the Armed Forces was primitive. The Air Force could not communicate directly with the Philippine Constabulary, the Army, or Navy. They had to course their communications through a central communications system. You can well imagine the inefficiency and contusion that this setup caused."
"83","We have now considerably improved that system. The equipment of all services of the Armed Forces has been standardized and integrated, and their radio services interlinked."
"84","Concerning the satellite system that we have set up, the private sector has established the main line, which starts from Baguio to Manila and from Manila to Cebu, and finally all the way down to Cagayan de Oro and Davao. This is the main line from which other lines will radiate to all provinces and cities. For instance, there are 1,000 Cebu telephone exchanges interconnected with the Cebu-Philippine Long Distance exchange, which has five incoming and outgoing trunks. This alone has increased the power of our communications system a thousand times."
"85","We have also set up a number of troposcatter stations around the country, including one in Ilocos Sur which will link us to Taipei."
"86","With the assistance of the USAID, we organized nonprofit rural electric service cooperatives. Two such cooperatives have been organized as pilot projects—one in Northern Mindanao and another in Negros Occidental. Their capital requirements were met by low-interest, long-term loans from both the Philippine and United States governments through their respective agencies. Six other electric service cooperatives in other regions are to be organized within the year. With the experience gained from these projects, we expect to extend the program of rural electrification through nonprofit, people-owned cooperatives throughout the country at the earliest time possible."
"87","Power development and transmission are also being accelerated. Feasibility studies are being made for the construction of a power transmission grid throughout Mindanao together with the gradual increase in power generation at the Maria Cristina Plant. A thermal plant is being constructed in Bataan. Plans are under way for the generation of about 1.5 million kilowatts in the Greater Manila Area and in Luzon within the next five years."
"88","I cannot overemphasize the importance of providing our people with cheap electric power. Adequate power is the base of a modern industrial economy."
"89","Before the year ends, we expect to complete the Manila and suburbs interim waterworks projects. We will also construct 65 more provincial waterworks systems. Studies are now being made to increase the capacity of the Manila and suburbs interim waterworks projects to meet the fast-growing needs of the area. Simultaneously, a master plan for a sewerage system for the metropolitan area is being prepared."
"90","Some 3,252 additional irrigation pumps will be installed. To meet this goal, we propose to tap Japanese reparations and to work out a deferred payment scheme for procuring additional irrigation units."
"91","We will continue to improve the Port of Manila. We also hope to complete the reclamation of 31 hectares of port area and to construct a breakwater in the InternationalPort, a marginal wharf at the domestic port, and a Fisherman’s Port at the NorthHarbor. We will construct and improve 17 other national ports and 53 municipal ports."
"92","We will continue working on the five major river control projects already started."
"93","Airport development in 1969 will consist of concrete paving of aircraft movement areas, and the extension of existing runways to accommodate larger jet-propelled airplanes. The airports to be improved are those at Cauayan, Cagayan de Oro, New Roxas, Tagbilaran, Tuguegarao, Legaspi, Surigao, and San Jose (Mindoro Occidental)."
"94","The construction of 7 out of 45 airports programmed for permanent improvement will be undertaken. To accommodate turboengine aircraft, we have also programmed 33 airports for repair and improvement of runways."
"95","In the past year, the GSIS has given no less than P99 million in salary loans and another P166 million in real estate loans. It has also granted P11 million in insurance claims and invested P128 million in stocks and bonds."
"96","During the last three years, the SSS has registered 813,600 wage earners and 21,600 employers, or 24.8% of all wage earners and 36.7% of all employers registered since 1957. As of the end of 1968, member-employers totaled 87,000, while wage earners totaled 2,215,600."
"97","The SSS has paid out a total of P153 million in all kinds of benefits over a period of 11 years and 4 months to about 460,000 members. Over one-half of this amount was paid in the last three years, during which the number of claims increased considerably. This increase could be attributed mainly to the speedy processing of claims."
"98","The Limay pilot project will yield lessons and examples for the establishment of similar projects in areas where economic development is sluggish. It envisions a complete industrial complex incorporating the industrial community formed by the Bataan Refinery, the ESSO Fertilizer Plant, the Bataan Thermal Plant, the Philippine Columbia Carbon Plant, the bulk storage facilities, and the Wood Mosaic Plant. A steel company, a textile company, a copper wire company, and sulfuric acid company have signified their intention to build their factories in the estate."
"99","Aside from stimulating the growth rate of the economy of the country, the industrial estates project will help decentralize industries, and thus help minimize socioeconomic problems such as unemployment, criminal delinquency, sub-standard housing, and the like."
"100","Inspired by this success, we directed the Manpower Development Council to undertake a nationwide program of “accelerated manpower training.” One hundred ten centers are now in operation from Batanes to Sulu."
"101","The principal government agencies engaged in the manpower development effort are the Manpower Development Council, the Department of Education, and the Department of Labor. The program is also supported by city and provincial executives, leaders in industry, and agriculture, labor, civic, and religious leaders. Above all, it has elicited enthusiastic response from our people."
"102","In the last six months, we have trained some 25,000 men and women at the cost of less than P100 per trainee. By the end of 1969, we hope to raise this total to 70,000."
"103","The manpower development program is a breakthrough in the solution of the perennial unemployment problem. For the first time, we have set up a national program designed to give new skills to workers who otherwise would have no chance to get formal training."
"104","The United Nations has also granted our request for special fund assistance valued at $2 million to the Philippine national industrial training plan. This project will equip our research and demonstration centers in support of our manpower program."
"105","A nationwide network of employment centers is the necessary complement to our skills training program. We have expanded the public employment service to strategic regional sites all over the country."
"106","We now urge the city and provincial governments to implement the executive agreements for the establishment of their own local employment centers."
"107","And finally, we ask for the immediate passage of the manpower training bill which is now in the Senate."
"108","More than 47% of all strikes in 1968 arose from interunion jurisdictional disputes. In fact, interunion raiding has become a major threat to industrial peace. To arrest this alarming development, we call on organized labor, especially on the leaders of the leading labor federations, to get together and adopt a code of ethics with a workable provision for no-union-raiding. At the same time, we have asked the Department of Labor to prepare a bill designed to correct this problem."
"109","The Filipino worker won substantial wage increase and fringe benefits and restitutions of wage differentials resulting from collective bargaining and direct enforcement work by our labor department. Roughly quantified, these accretions amount to about P350 million."
"110","This year, as in previous years, we shall demand that the worker and his family be given their due share of the fruits of our national drive for growth and development."
"111","We have a program to aid private education, notably the Philippines-U.S. trust fund of P24 million from which grants and loans will be made available to private schools. Projects related to national development have been given priority. The fund will double in 10 years."
"112","Our government will also set up its own P24-million trust fund for private education. Earnings from this fund will help private schools update courses related to development. The fund will also be used to stimulate university growth in various regions of the country, thus easing student congestion in Manila."
"113","We have also funds to improve private medical schools. We plan a medical internship dispersal project under which interns will be asked to do a tour of duty in provincial hospitals. This might also arouse their social conscience and reduce the “brain drain.”"
"114","The MindanaoStateUniversity in MarawiCity has been maintained as a center for Muslim studies and culture."
"115","All these show that we have responded to the challenge of an imminent revolution in education that demands an educational perspective appropriate to a nation moving forward into the 1970s."
"116","Cognizant of its role in the cultural development of the country, the National Library has started the first postwar inventory of its holdings. To enable our scholars and students to use its collection, it has created special reading rooms—an Asia Room, Theses and Dissertations Room, Rare Books and Manuscripts Room, Social Sciences and Humanities Room. It has also organized additional libraries, bringing the total to 32 provincial libraries, 16 city libraries, 229 municipal libraries, and 19 barrio libraries. We plan to set up reading centers in all barrios."
"117","Through a National Advisory Council on Libraries, we intend to initiate a system for coordinating all types of libraries, whether public, special, university, and private libraries, to make the total library resources of the country available to all."
"118","Our present building for the NationalMuseum, however, leaves much to be desired, and we plan to provide a new location, possibly one of the government buildings at the Agrifina Circle in the RizalPark."
"119","Our national archival materials, now safely housed in the National Library, are being processed, cataloged, and microfilmed for the use of the scholars and researchers. This meets a long-felt need of Filipino scholarship."
"120","Also under our youth program is the Summer Reforestation Project. I have released P175,000 for this program which now has 8,000 youth volunteers in 33 provinces."
"121","Other volunteers conduct free tutorial classes in summer for out-of-school youth. Senior vocational students give training in basic skills, while bright college and high school students tutor elementary pupils in civics, reading, writing, and arithmetic."
"122","We also have youth volunteers working at community sanitation, repair of roads and bridges, agricultural extension work, literacy classes, and community beautification."
"123","The following statistics should illustrate the paucity and inadequacy of scientific manpower and investment in our country."
"124","In the United States, there are 853 scientists per million population; Russia has 772 scientists per million; West Germany has 486; France has 333; Italy, 350; Australia, 334. In the Philippines, we have 135 scientists per 1 million Filipinos."
"125","Again, in the United States, the per capita expenditure of science is P90. In England, it is P60. In the Philippines it is from P0.60 to P0.65. This goes show how far we lag behind developed countries with respect to our investment on technology and scientific research."
"126","Recognizing the primary importance of science and technology in national growth, the government has accelerated its program to encourage scientific research and development far beyond all previous levels."
"127","The program of graduate and undergraduate training of science scholars was continued. Thirty-eight foreign scholarships for advanced training of deserving staff members of the board and its agencies were obtained from different international agencies and through bilateral agreements."
"128","The government also conducted a workshop on fisheries and oceanography to accelerate fishery research and to identify areas in which science-based technology might be applied for economic development."
"129","Our nation, acting alone, cannot do it. I think this is the lesson that the sixth decade of the twentieth century has taught us. We must act in concert, small and great nations alike, to achieve common objectives. Despite Vietnam, the Middle East, and Czechoslovakia, the world to day is in a better position to meet, in common constructive endeavor, the challenges of building a durable peace."
"130","The prospective conquest of the moon has electrified the imagination of the world. If we can harness the courage, the vision, and the daring of the space travelers towards the solution of terrestrial problems, then perhaps we can begin to make that bold stride towards the future."
"131","Two great challenges face the world today. The first is the problem of peace and security. The second is raising the living standards of peoples everywhere. No one would dream of minimizing the difficulties of these problems. In both the stakes are large—the future of generations to come and the survival of life as we know it. We of this generation hold the future in mortgage. We cannot afford to fail."
"132","We must prepare for that day. We must prepare to coexist peaceably with Communist China. For our part, this means relentless work towards full self-development, so that we can live beside our powerful neighbor with confidence and dignity. For her own part, Communist China must accept the fact that superior military strength cannot justify aggression."
"133","I believe that the faith and goodwill, as well as the competence, for peaceable coexistence exist in the heart and mind of all Asians."
"134","As far as the Philippines is concerned, external Communist aggression represents a minimal threat—at least not to the extent we once felt it to be. Our real problem is the growth of internal Communism arising from urgent economic problems. The main thrust of my administration is towards economic development or, which is the real meaning of economic growth, raising the living standards of our people."
"135","On the theory that U.S. withdrawal would cause a power vacuum in the region, Japan is being increasingly talked about as the inheritor of the role of the United States. All possible contingencies are being studied by the Philippines."
"136","My administration is undertaking an intensive study of the problem."
"137","These impediments are considerable but not insurmountable. The practical aspects of cooperation will be mastered in time and as for conflicts, they should be isolated and solved peacefully and in accordance with tested procedures of international law. In this way, we may succeed in preventing disruption of regional cooperation activities."
"138","For this reason, we have proposed, more than once, the creation of an Asian political forum, to help solve intraregional conflicts or, at least, defuse potentially explosive situations."
"139","Another reason we attach great value to regional cooperation is that, individually, the nations of Southeast Asia are hard-pressed to achieve the objectives of independence in the economic sphere. In the case of the Philippines, the first objective of self-sufficiency in the staple foods has been achieved. But beyond that, we feel that regional cooperation can accelerate growth."
"140","We will pursue the claim peacefully in keeping with the spirit of previous understandings with Malaysia and in accordance with the principles of national law. The claim is in the national interest and we intend to pursue it by making use of all available peaceful resources. We are encouraged by the fact that many of our Asian friends are helping in the search for a modus vivendi between the Philippines and Malaysia."
"141","Our defense policies have begun to take these emerging changes into account, to follow three guidelines."
"142","A more workable relationship with the United States, based on realism and mutual advantage, should be developed."
"143","In this connection, it should be noted that the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) has been plagued by disunity, giving rise to severe criticisms as well as to doubts that it can and will do the part for which it was created in 1954. In any case, SEATO can, in the meantime, be strengthened. But another organization can issue out of the present situation."
"144","Since the end of the last war, Philippine defense policies have been formulated in response to entirely foreign, domestically irrelevant crises, such as Berlin. Korea, the Congo, even Vietnam. For the first time, an issue of tremendous domestic importance has come up: to recover a territory about which a great many of our citizens, particularly in the South, feet strongly."
"145","The settlement depends of course on a number of variables, any one of which may upset the formula for settlement."
"146","On our part, we have been consistent with our declarations of peaceful intention. We have doused the war-fever that raged in the South. We shall continue to search for solutions that are in keeping with our dignity and integrity as a nation and with our regional commitments."
"147","As we had envisioned in 1967, we were able to export rice worth $5.9 million to different countries. We suffered a temporary setback in our exportation program due to the long drought that hit a wide area of Luzon and the typhoons that destroyed our crops. However, with the present trend in rice production, we expect to be able to resume exportation this year."
"148","We attribute this success in rice production to the effective implementation by the Rice and Corn Administration of the Price Support Law which was enacted in March 1966. This Price Support Law increased the price of palay from P12 to P16 a cavan, and of corn from P9 to P13 a cavan. In addition, the RCA has a going program to improve warehousing techniques, rice milling methods, and marketing."
"149","Although we expect to be 7.5 million cavans shy of our projection of 121 million cavans for the Crop Year 1968-1969 because of the natural calamities that .came our way, we expect our rice supply to remain plentiful and the price to remain lower than the projected level, although higher than last crop year."
"150","With the tremendous success and confidence gained, as well as the lessons learned in the last three years, we are optimistic about our agricultural capability."
"151","These have been made possible by the increase of technical knowledge and the channeling of fresh resources to the agricultural sector. Our experience in 1968 proved that only through the use of technology in agriculture can we realize the goal of maximum agricultural productivity."
"152","These developments prompt us to view with boundless optimism the prospects of food abundance in the near future."
"153","However, in spite of the major breakthroughs we made in agricultural research, there is still much that remains to be done. We hope soon to make the Philippine Coconut Research Institute fully operational. It is crucial for us to improve the productivity of our coconut plantations so that we can ward off the encroachment of soybeans and synthetics in our traditional markets for coconut products. The same goes for the sugar industry. There is an urgent need to raise sugarcane productivity so that this industry can earn more foreign exchange."
"154","The promise that was once Mindanao is now fast becoming reality. The influx of investments in new coconut plantations, citrus and coffee farms, bananas and pineapples, hog farms and cattle ranches in our southern frontier strongly attests to the foresight and pragmatism of our new breed of entrepreneurs who have chosen to go south. All these would not have taken place, however, without the vigorous support of our financial institutions who have gone into partnership with our pioneering entrepreneurs."
"155","By the end of this month, we expect the completion and operation of five ice plants, one each in Mercedes, Camarines Norte; Masinloc, Zambales; Guiuan, Samar; Sagay, Negros Occidental; and Magallanes, Sorsogon."
"156","By June of 1969, we expect two more ice plants to be in full operation. These ice plants are situated Barugao, Leyte, and Liminangcong, Palawan."
"157","By the end of Fiscal Year 1969, these seven ice plants will produce 8,000 MT of ice. The remaining 10 ice plants are now in various stages of construction."
"158","We expect to operate our 40-ton ice plant in Bato-Bato, Sulu, and the ice plant in New Washington, Aklan, by December of this year. Other ice plants and cold storages now under construction in Bayawan, Negros Oriental; Pala-Pala, Iloilo; Saravia, Negros Occidental; Dalahican, Quezon; Jolo, Sulu; and Pio Duran, Albay will be in operation in 1970."
"159","To invite investments, the Board of Investments has made fishponds and deep-sea fishing priority areas for government assistance. A fishing port is being constructed in Navotas which will be backed up by the Greater Manila Terminal Food Market to serve a major outlet for fresh food commodities, including fish."
"160","Coupled with the investment incentives and the infrastructure support being given to the fishing industry, we now propose to set up a regional fishery research center with the support of the countries in Southeast Asia and Japan and the U.S. government. This center will conduct basic and applied research on freshwater and brackish water fishery."
"161","We will also continue to stock our major lakes, swamps, and other inland bodies of water with fry and fingerlings."
"162","We have to find new uses for abaca. Long and painstaking research efforts are now starting to pay off. Several pulp and paper plants are now using low-grade abaca for pulp production. Abaca is now being used for tea bags. Studies are being made for the use of abaca for textiles as well as to replace jute in the production of sacks for rice, fertilizer, and sugar. The Gomez process for the manufacture of abaca chips as raw material for long-fibered pulp will soon be tested on a commercial scale with the establishment of a pilot project with the financial support of the National Development Company. The Board of Investments has included the manufacture of long-fibered pulp in the priority areas for investment. In the long run, diversification appears to be the only feasible solution to the abaca problem. In the short run, we are exploring new markets for abaca within the Socialist bloc; we have also asked our friends in the Western block to refrain from further disturbing the market for natural fibers."
"163","I refer to the Greater Manila Terminal Food Market, or GMTFM, which will be the first of a network of food terminals to be established in strategic places all over the country. The GMTFM will rise, before the end of this year, on a 120-hectare lot in FortBonifacio along the South Superhighway. When completed the GMTFM will be a combined producer-wholesaler-transit market complex equipped with the latest in storage, refrigeration, food handling, and trading equipment for effective wholesale distribution of the produce of more than 1 million food farmers from 27 supplier-provinces in Luzon, the Visayas, and Mindanao."
"164","The GMTFM will not, as mistakenly believed, buy and sell for its own account but will provide the facilities and services to enable farm producers, wholesalers, and other legitimate traders and large-scale consumers to engage in spot wholesale buying and selling of fresh produce under conditions of free market interplay to prevent any group from monopolizing or cornering the supply of fresh produce."
"165","The GMTFM will, however, not merely provide physical marketing facilities but will correct the sharp imbalances between food supply and demand, with their attendant violent price fluctuations. It will be deeply involved in various programs and projects intended to change the produce marketing system in our country, and it will protect the small food growers from exploitation by unscrupulous middlemen. It is presently engaged in the organization of cooperatives of producers who will be financed from production to marketing by six commercial banks chosen by the Bankers Association to the extent of P60 million to P120 million."
"166","Along with correction of food supply and demand imbalances and erratic price fluctuations and raising the income of our rural population, the GMTFM will, among others, promote ancillary and service industries; strengthen the food processing industries by assuring them a steady supply of quality and graded food commodities; develop superior varieties of food crops; introduce new techniques of fresh food preservation, handling and transport, packaging and trading; create a favorable climate for the export of certain commodities; and even improve the dietary habits of Filipinos. All these will generate far-reaching social and economic benefits."
"167","Under the selective logging system, only the mature timber of at least 60 centimeters in diameter may be cut, thus leaving behind a healthy residual and logged-over area for future harvest. Thus, without damage to our forest resources, logging areas expanded significantly during the last three years, with the aggregate annual allowable cut increasing from 6,439,059 cubic meters in 1966 to 11,048,008 cubic meters in 1968. Consequently, the total income of the government from forest charges during the three-year period reached the unprecedented amount of P112,582,139.83."
"168","At the same time, disposable forest lands were opened to profitable uses, including fishponds, recreation sites and resorts, pastures, private camps, radio stations or communications station sites, and the like."
"169","During the period, 10 watershed forest reserves with a total area of 103,107.6 hectares were established, while 16 other watershed areas were surveyed."
"170","Reforestation is being carried out by the government, schoolchildren, volunteers, loggers, and civic organizations. However, their efforts are not enough. Vast tracts still have to be reforested. This year, we will intensify our reforestation effort. Our target is the reforestation of denuded watershed areas and forest parks. At the same time, we will improve our system of guarding our forests. I have also asked the relevant agencies of the government to prepare a comprehensive wildlife conservation plan. I intend during my incumbency to do everything to conserve our forests and wildlife."
"171","In the past years, the PACD served 16,000 barrios as against only 3,600 during the four years of the previous administration. This is a gain of 345%."
"172","A new feature of the community development program is the participation of the private sector. Some of the major activities undertaken with private support are Operation “Kasama’” in cooperation with the University of Santo Tomas; low-cost housing project for rural areas in cooperation with the Archdiocese of Sorsogon; the Lanao special operations in cooperation with the Asia Foundation and Mindanao State University; and many others."
"173","The integrated program is, of necessity, a program of priorities—because the children must be saved immediately, they have come first. Thus, the Nayon ng Kabataan at the Manila International Airport; the Reception and Study Center in Bago Bantay; the Marillac Hills project for girls. Work has begun on the MolaveVillage, a training school for boys in Tanay. Because they don’t have long to live, and because we have a special affection for them, the aged will soon have a home near the Reception and StudyCenter in Bago Bantay. The pattern is unmistakable: As quickly as possible, Welfareville, long a byword for hopelessness, is being decongested, and its population moved out to the countryside where nothing is being spared, nothing that funds and technical knowledge can give, to provide them with a new hold on life."
"174","I invite my countrymen, particularly the Liberals, to visit these homes, and to see for themselves how much we can do and how far we can go, when we are driven not by self-aggrandizement but by the plaintive cry of the foundling and the orphan, the neglected, and the abandoned. The integrated social program does not stop here; when the children will have been taken care of, it will turn its attention to the mentally helpless, both young and old. We are determined to do everything for the NationalMental Hospital, and the mentally retarded children and the unfortunates in the barrios. Afterward, the preventive aspects of welfare work will have a share of attention—projects will be put up for out-of-school youths; community programs and youth centers will receive greater support."
"175","The provincial small settlers protection committees will be greatly strengthened under the Small Farmers Commission. Cases of land-grabbing, exploitation of poor and ignorant settlers and cultural minorities by unscrupulous and powerful persons and entities, once brought to the attention of the commission, will be promptly investigated; the whole machinery of the government as well as the powers of the Presidency will be used to protect the rights of these pioneer farmers and to secure for them the assistance of appropriate government agencies."
"176","Consistent with the forest conservation requirements of the country, we have directed the Bureau of Forestry and the Bureau of Lands to speed up the reclassification of forest lands suitable to agriculture and to release these as alienable and disposable lands as soon as possible so that the legitimate desire of our landless citizens to own land and become independent farmers can be fulfilled."
"177","We have likewise directed the Board of Liquidators to speed up distribution of former alien-owned lands and settlers’ farms under the old LASEDECO. I am determined that the government under my administration shall move with utmost dispatch in fulfilling its responsibility to the landless."
"178","One of the immediate goals of this administration is to develop Mindanao. To attain that goal, we have recently revitalized the Mindanao Development Authority which will plan and direct the rational development of that vast fertile island."
"179","At the same time, we have launched the Sulu development program and established the Mindanao and Sulu Development Commission, which coordinates all national agencies involved in the socioeconomic development of our southern islands. The Muslims and the other cultural minorities shall continue to receive preferential attention under this administration."
"180","In Asia, India reported an increase of 37% in 1963; 20% for Hong Kong in 1965; 12% for South Korea on index crimes for every 100,000 inhabitants in 1964; 61% for Malaysia on index crimes in 1964; and 22% for Thailand on index crimes in 1964."
"181","In sharp contrast, a study of the crime rate in the Philippines from 1962 to 1965 shows an increase of about 8%."
"182","In 1966, the volume of crimes recorded was 18% higher than 1962. However, in 1968, the crime incidence registered a decrease of about 9% compared to 1966. Expressed in terms of crime rate, this means that the rate of crime incidence in 1966 was reduced by 14 counts for every 100,000 inhabitants in 1968. The reversal of the crime trend in 1968 is attributed to the reduction of crime in the Greater Manila Area as a consequence of the revitalization of the METROCOM and the establishment of a system of cooperation among law enforcement agencies in the metropolitan area."
"183","Statistics will show that for the period 1962 to 1965, about 77% of the total number of crimes were committed in Metropolitan Manila, and 13% in the rest of the country. In 1966 and 1967, the percentage of crime incidence in Metropolitan Manila went up to 82%, but dropped to 77% in 1968—a level equal to that of 1962. A significant portion of this reduction was registered in index crimes. The percentage of these index crimes went down to 62% from 68% in 1962."
"184","The conclusions of the Walton Report were (1) the performance of many law enforcement agencies is substandard; (2) police training is inadequate; (3) political interference is common; (4) the facilities, budget, and logistical support are deficient; (5) inspection procedures are nonexistent or unsatisfactory; and (6) morale is low."
"185","We are well on the way to implementing the recommendations of the Walton Report."
"186","The national government has been seriously hampered in developing a more effective peace and order program by the fact that peace and order has traditionally been the primary concern of local governments. This has set up limitations to its ability to take over responsibility for peace and order everywhere in the country."
"187","At the same time, financing difficulties have prevented the procurement of adequate arms, vehicles, laboratory equipment, and other facilities, not to mention the need to increase police personnel in many places. To help reduce this problem, the Office of the President has time and again bought the equipment and other facilities of a number of police forces with savings in the Executive Department, but there is no specific appropriation for our police forces."
"188","The administration anchors its peace and order programs on the concept of community action. While the national government is committed to provide leadership, coordination, technical and financial assistance, the local governments and the private sector are enjoined to respond in a manner that will ensure the success of the programs."
"189","Every possible measure is now being undertaken to improve police efficiency both on the provincial and municipal levels."
"190","Towards the end of 1968, a crash training program was inaugurated to give basic training to policemen in the lower grades as well as to recruits. The first group consisted of trainees from the police forces of Pampanga and Tarlac. Similar courses will be opened in 12 other training centers. The POLCOM has also trained 1,940 chairmen and members of local boards of investigators to upgrade and to systematize investigation procedures in administrative cases."
"191","The crash training program will initially train 1,000 policemen each quarter. This number will be increased as facilities and funds are made available."
"192","Hand in hand with this upgrading program is a rigid process which has been developed to remove misfits and undesirables in police forces. A total of 101 policemen have been dismissed with prejudice, 21 suspended, and 8 reprimanded or admonished in 239 cases acted upon by the POLCOM. The appalling state of police efficiency before corrective measures were undertaken is reflected in the fact that some 20,000 out of 30,000 policemen were not qualified to join the police force."
"193","Administrative reforms have been instituted, and more are being carried out, in the Bureaus of Customs and Internal Revenue, where the greatest incidence of graft and corruption may be found."
"194","These have resulted in numerous suspensions and dismissals. Among the more prominent cases are the following."
"195","On October 7, 1966, we ordered the suspension of two Customs officials and a Customs guard found involved in the illegal transfer of cargo, causing a loss of P50,000 to the government. The Customs personnel who were suspended were Rodolfo Espino, acting chief of the manufacturing warehouses; Cesar Santos, assistant commissioner for operations and concurrently chairman of Cargo Inventory and Disposal Committee; and Edgardo de los Santos, a guard. Administrative charges had been filed against the two officials and the guard by Gen. Pelagio Cruz, the head of the Anti-SmugglingActionCenter."
"196","On November 28, 1966, we ordered the suspension of Health Undersecretary Rodolfo Canos upon the recommendation of the special committee that investigated the charges against this official. He was found guilty of willful neglect of duty, grave abuse of authority, dishonesty, and conduct prejudicial to the best interest of the service. He was dismissed from the service on August 10, 1967."
"197","On March 30, 1967, we suspended for three months Judge Alfredo C. Mabayad of the municipal court of Roxas, Isabela, after he was found guilty of gross negligence and dereliction of duty."
"198","On July 27, 1967, we ordered the preventive suspension of Capts. Vicente M. Orlina and Arturo llagan and Crisanto G. Almoguera, members of the Board of Examiners for Marine Engineers, who were held responsible for the leakage of questions for an examination given in Cebu City. They had been administratively charged by Commissioner Abelardo Subido for bribery."
"199","On August 14, 1967, we suspended for one year Fiscal Carlo Lozada of Surigao del Norte for improper conduct, arising from charges of oppression and harassment. He was also sternly warned that repetition of the offense would be dealt with more severely."
"200","On September 19, 1967, we suspended Governor Javier Ariosa of Zamboanga del Sur, who was found guilty of charges of oppression, dishonesty, and grave misconduct."
"201","On January 6, 1968, we suspended and later dismissed from office District Judge Gaudencio Cloribel of Manila."
"202","On March 16, 1968, we suspended Land Registration Commissioner Antonio Nohlejas on grounds of “gross negligence and acts prejudicial to the public interest” for approving subdivision plans based on the new surveys that encroached into public lands. His resignation was accepted later."
"203","On April 27, 1968, we fired Chairman Tomas Martin, Board Members William Buquid and Rene Garcia of the Board of Liquidators for abuse of presidential confidence in the disposal of the 15,925,545 shares of the government in the Lepanto Consolidated Mining Company."
"204","On July 25, 1966, we fired Provincial Fiscal Geminiano Beloso of Batangas for the loss of over 5,000 cartons of smuggled cigarettes placed in his custody as evidence in the case. The Department of Justice found him guilty of dishonesty and incompetence."
"205","On August 28, 1966, we ordered the dismissal of Provincial Fiscal Juan Salazar and Assistant Fiscal Eliezer Tengco, both of Laguna. Administrative charges were filed against them for dishonesty, misconduct, and dereliction of duty while prosecuting a smuggling case involving 7,600 cartons of blue seal cigarettes."
"206","On November 11, 1966, we were informed of the dismissal of nine SSS employees for venalities ranging from dishonesty to immorality. SSS Administrator Gilberto Teodoro pointed out in his report that although the SSS is outside the civil service, the system is applying civil service procedures to employees facing administrative charges to assure them due process and to remove suspicion of arbitrariness on the part of the SSS management. Teodoro said that 79 administrative cases have been brought against SSS employees. Forty-two have already been fired as of November 10, 1966."
"207","On March 29, 1967, we ordered the dismissal of the three municipal judges, namely: Fernando B. Fuentes Jr. of Nunungan. Lanao del Norte; Crispin N. Menchavez of Santa Fe, Cebu; and Vicente M. Salumbides of Tagkawayan, Quezon, who were found guilty of dishonesty, dereliction of duty, and gross ignorance of the law. On April 1, 1967, we fired Horacio T. Aquino, municipal judge of Panganiban, Catanduanes; and Eloy David, municipal judge of Clark Field, Pampanga. Investigation conducted by a district judge found Judge Aquino guilty of grave misconduct and habitual drunkenness. Judge David was found by investigators guilty of gross incompetence and ignorance of the elementary rules of court procedures."
"208","On May 16, 1967, we ordered the dismissal of Davao Chief of Police Monebrio F. Abellana, on the recommendation of Solicitor General Antonio Barredo, who investigated charges against him and who found him guilty of all charges brought against him except toleration of gambling."
"209","On June 23, 1967, we fired Judge Pascual Beltran of the Municipal Court of Buenavista, Iloilo, and Judge Pedro San Roque of the Municipal Court of Virac, Catanduanes, for serious misconduct and inefficiency. Their cases were investigated by District Judge Feliciano Gonzales of the Court of First Instance of Catanduanes, and the findings were reviewed by then Undersecretary Claudio Teehankee."
"210","On June 24, 1967, we dismissed two municipal judges and suspended another. We dismissed Abstenencio Lobitana of Domangig, Zamboanga del Sur Peace Court and Romeo Laurente of the Matab-ob, Leyte Peace Court, who were both found guilty of the administrative charges filed against them. And we suspended for three months without pay Municipal Judge Lorenzo Tecson of SanMiguel, Bulacan Peace Court for ignorance of the law and for issuing “an unjust interlocutory case for robbery.”"
"211","On August 13, 1967, we dismissed Provincial Treasurer Hadji Urang Naga, who was found guilty of gross negligence, incurring unauthorized overdrafts, and misuse of trust funds."
"212","On August 24, 1967, we removed from office Municipal Judge Daniel O. Osumo of Kibawe, Bukidnon, after investigations by District Judge Abundo Z. Ameta revealed that Osumo had taken long, unauthorized leaves."
"213","On October 7, 1967, we ordered the dismissal of Leocadio A. Vargas, mayor of Mainit, Surigao del None, for neglect of duties amounting to abandonment of his post."
"214","On October 11, 1967, we dismissed Fifth Assistant Fiscal Salvador Macainan of Bacolod City for gross misconduct and abandonment of office. The administrative order removing Macainan from his office took note of the fact that Macainan is one of the several persons charged with murder in Negros Occidental Court of First Instance."
"215","On November 18, 1967, we ordered the immediate dismissal of Jacinto R. Acaling, register of deeds of Aklan, for unexplained shortage in collections and unauthorized absence from his post."
"216","On November 30, 1967, we ordered the dismissal of City Engineer Godotredo Trinchera of OrmocCity, who was found guilty of malversation of funds, illegal use of government property, and violation of the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act."
"217","On March 5, 1968, we fired Judge Gregorio D. Montejo of Zamboanga City on recommendation of the Supreme Court. He was found guilty of ignorance of the law and of advancing his personal interest through his office."
"218","On March 22, 1968, we were informed by POLCOM Chairman Crispinode Castro that he dismissed Chief of Police Genaro C. Ferrer of Binmaley, Pangasinan; Balbino Ibana of Talisay, Cainarines Norte; Deputy Chief of Police Marcefo Abad of Gingoog City; Corporal Emeriano Bonifacio of Binmaley, Pangasinan; and Corporal Enrique Parungao of Gapan, Nueva Ecija."
"219","On January 18, 1969, we ordered the dismissal of Municipal Judge Eligio C. Dajao of Oroquieta, Misamis Occidental; and the suspension for six months of Assistant City Fiscal Felizardo L. Espino of RoxasCity. Judge Dajao was found guilty of negligence and ignorance of the law in the disposition of certain criminal cases brought before his sala. Fiscal Espino was found guilty of serious dereliction of duty."
"220","On January 18, 1969, we ordered the dismissal of Municipal Judge Arturo A. Glagara of Talisay, Negros Occidental, for improper conduct, partially in the disposition of cases, and gross dereliction of duty."
"221","Friends and political allies have been treated with equal severity."
"222","To remove even the shadow of secrecy from any government transaction, we have invited the opposition party to send a representative to the Cabinet Bidding Committee. The function of this body is to review and to approve all contracts entered into by the government. The opposition party had earlier refused this invitation. We appeal to them to reconsider this unaccountable stand."
"223","Our actions prove that we are determined to go after grafters and corrupt government officials. We encourage the citizens to participate in our campaign against graft and corruption by reporting all cases of immorality, dishonesty, and venality in the public service to my office."
"224","If these complaints are substantiated, then swift and decisive action will be taken."
"225","At the same time that we sought to bring down unemployment and to provide security to labor, we recognized as a correlative and equally important concern the housing of our expanding population and the rehabilitation of our cities. These problems are relatively new to our society, but these have increasingly become areas of grave concern in our national plans and goals."
"226","Accordingly, the administration mapped out an integrated program of urban renewal, with the various government agencies involved as the key to its implementation. These agencies were the People’s Homesite and Housing Corporation, the Department of Social Welfare, the Social Security System, and the Government Service Insurance System."
"227","Much of the work was concentrated in the urban sectors of the country where people have tended to congregate in ever-increasing number. The combined resources of government agencies made possible the relocation and resettlement of the urban poor as well as the extension of low-cost housing assistance to the low-salaried middle class. We have succeeded in a limited way in clearing our ghettos, and helped ameliorate the lives of resettled slum dwellers."
"228","As everybody knows, housing continues to be a serious national problem. The housing needs of the country, if spread out over a 20-year period, would be about 470,000 dwelling units a year, computed at 100,000 units in urban areas and 370,000 in rural areas. Viewed in the light of past performance and present capabilities of both the government and private sectors, the requirement assumes discouraging proportions. Nevertheless, something must be done if we are to prevent the degeneration of urban centers into slum squatters areas."
"229","In 1968, we launched a novel nationwide housing program designed to benefit simultaneously both low-income and middle-income sectors of the population."
"230","This program is a departure from traditional housing programs of government institutions, which usually finance both lots and buildings within subdivision areas or “projects.”"
"231","The cost of the houses should be from P5,000 for the lowest-cost units to P25,000, payable in 25 years at 6% interest and without any down payment."
"232","The program, therefore, will be free from the limitations of project-type housing which, among other disadvantages, involves huge outlays of funds for land acquisition, development, sales, administration, and maintenance. It is also seen as a big step towards the reorientation of the Filipino attitude towards complete individuality in housing, a factor that has prevented the population from benefiting from economies of scale resulting from mass production of prefabricated units. Eventually, it is also expected to clear the path for private enterprise to take over or assume a more active role in urban and housing development."
"233","The economic and social impact of this program cannot be gainsaid. The extensive use of locally manufactured and fabricated construction materials, such as cement, coupled with the use of Philippine labor, will generate higher productivity and incomes."
"234","The average- or low-income citizen can then be given the opportunity to own real property of such quality and durability that will not only satisfy his and his family’s needs but will give him a feeling of belonging and security."
"235","Since some questions have been raised about the means to implement this program, I ask Congress to help salvage a laudable project that is urgently needed by our people."
"236","Good transportation is a basic requirement of a developing country; but much of our transport system has suffered from past neglect and inefficient operation. In the case of government-supplied facilities, the main bottleneck has been shortage of funds. We have been trying, in connection with our infrastructure program, to define our transportation needs as precisely as possible and to operate a program as efficiently as we possibly can."
"237","For land reform to be meaningful, more areas must be placed under its protective mantle. Soon after assuming office in 1966, we proclaimed the entire 2nd District of Pampanga, comprising 12 municipalities, as a land reform area. In February 1968, 22 towns in Nueva Ecija were placed under land reform. And in September 1968, 11 towns and 1 city in the 1st District of Laguna also became a land reform area. And so today, land reform covers 60 municipalities and 2 cities in 12 provinces, and involves 86,939 farmers."
"238","But we have been partially paralyzed by the lack of a source of funds. Congress eliminated the provisions that established the source of financing of land reform operations when it passed the Land Reform Code. We are asking Congress for funds to finance land reform, but as an alternative we plan to sell FortBonifacio, CampAguinaldo, CampCrame, and other government properties in the four cities of the metropolitan area. FortBonifacio could bring in P500 million and Camp Aguinaldo another P500 million. The money will be used for land reform operations and to boost agricultural productivity in land reform areas."
"239","As a corollary to the leasehold system and eventual land ownership, we have slopped up our resettlement program. We consider it our prime social responsibility to provide land to those displaced by urban and industrial development."
"240","Some of the notable accomplishments in Central Luzon in 1968:"
"241","In agricultural productivity, P38,986,757.03 in loans was released by the ACA to hundreds of thousands of farmers. From July to November 1968 alone, a total of P9,683,168.87 was issued to 18,848 farmer-borrowers. On the other hand, Central Bank-sponsored loans totaling P128,191,612 were released to 757,536 farmers for farm production, farm mechanization, poultry, fish culture, irrigation pumps and engines, and the development of private irrigation systems. In addition, P12,314,621 was released in commercial loans to 10,488 persons, P3,149,465 in industrial loans to 2,961 persons and P168,900 in other loans to 528 persons. At the same time, 276,250 bags of fertilizers valued at P3,892,400 were distributed in the area. Moreover, 4,215,771 animals were vaccinated, hundreds of thousands of vials of free drugs and biologics were distributed; thousands of cavans of certified seeds, especially the high-yield varieties were procured and distributed; 196,790.83 hectares were surveyed for soil conservation and 637 hectares for topography."
"242","In public works and water resources development, 1,290 pumps irrigating 32,052 hectares were installed, while 765 artesian wells were either set up or repaired; 113,999,802 kilometers of concrete, asphalt and feeder roads were built while 999,152 lineal meters of bridges were constructed; the Pampanga River Irrigation System in Talavera, Nueva Ecija, irrigating 23,500 hectares and costing P885,000 was completed, while 26 communal irrigation projects irrigating 9,625 hectares were finished, and 54 irrigation pump units irrigating 10,149 hectares were rehabilitated."
"243","In health, 2,320,636 persons were vaccinated; 474,829 mothers and children were extended health services; 11,417 potable water supply and sanitary toilets were constructed, while the ArayatEmergencyHospital, the BaliwagEmergencyHospital, and the San Miguel Emergency Hospital were activated."
"244","In education, 1,178 new schoolbuildings, mostly of the Marcos-type, were distributed and installed; study seminars on the planting of high-yield rice varieties were conducted."
"245","In the administration of justice, 682 cases were terminated and legal assistance was extended to 11,898 farmers."
"246","In labor, 2,205 agricultural establishments involving 39,360 farmworkers were inspected to insure compliance with the Land Reform Code and other labor laws, and payment of P1,442,612 in various benefits was effected in favor of 1,500 workers."
"247","In social welfare, P327,000 was doled out to indigent families in the area."
"248","Preliminary studies by the Board of Investments have revealed the extent of our industrialization. It has also shown some areas in which the administration of incentives can be improved and other areas in which new incentives should be granted, and I commend these areas to the attention of Congress."
"249","I am recommending the establishment of a trust fund from which can be drawn increases in teachers’ salaries, cost of living allowances, and other fringe benefits. The trust fund for teachers may be started with an initial P5 million from the Department of Finance. This money and its earnings can then be used for the benefit of our teachers."
"250","I ask the Department of Education to intervene in student and youth strikes and demonstrations and explore way sand means of realizing their constructive and reasonable demands."
"251","I propose the creation of a textbook commission for this purpose. I propose the upgrading of the quality of education by inculcating professionalism and raising the quality of teachers, among others by stricter supervision of teacher training and by entrusting the examination of teachers to educators sitting as a board of examiners."
"252","The growth of barrio high schools has been phenomenal. Starting with only four schools in 1964, there are today, under a policy of encouragement of this administration, 1,200 barrio high schools all over the country, employing some 6,000 teachers and providing instruction to 120,000 students."
"253","The establishment of barrio high schools has contributed greatly to the reduction of the number of dropouts from both the grade schools and the high schools. The rate of dropouts before my administration was estimated at 59%."
"254","Existing regular high schools cannot possibly accommodate all the graduates from elementary schools. There are only 279 regular high schools in the country today."
"255","We must, by legislation, support the barrio high schools and remove any doubts as to its legality as an institution."
"256","I also invite Congress to consider proposals coming from the constituents of the university itself for the revision of its fundamental law, the University Charter that dates back to 1908. The restructuring of the StateUniversity will have to be consistent with the constitutional guarantee of academic freedom for state universities and the principles of self-determination that the UP faculty and students now invoke."
"257","I propose that we now study and systematize the sources of government financing and their proper allocations, including the present classification of special funds."
"258","I propose to cut at least P200 million from the budgetary proposal for the coming fiscal year. This is the same amount I have directed all departments to save from the budget of the current fiscal year."
"259","I propose that Congress now act immediately on all bills pending before it for the improvement of the tax collecting machinery of government, including the consolidated bill on the Internal Revenue Code, the omnibus amendments on the Tariff and Customs Code, especially those pertaining to the removal of escape clauses and ambiguous provisions in both codes and such ambiguous terms as “and others” in the classification of goods for purposes of taxation and tariff duties."
"260","On the moral plane, this will promote disciplined living among the citizenry, especially among the more affluent and more fortunate."
"261","I propose that domestic importers be given inducements to finance their imports from trade credits available directly from their suppliers whether the importers are independent companies or subsidiaries of foreign corporations."
"262","In line with this policy, the SSS, the GSIS, the DBP, the PHHC, and the National Housing Corporation have already shifted the emphasis of their housing programs to low-cost housing. This policy will be pursued vigorously in the coming years."
"263","I further recommend that a sum sufficient to liquidate long-overdue obligations of the RCA to the Philippine National Bank be appropriated. The payment of these debts, which arose out of previous rice importations, can be effected through a refinancing scheme."
"264","The proceeds will constitute a huge fund to finance massive and nationwide land reform and the modernization of our agriculture."
"265","I submit that during this brief time we have realized, to a significant extent, the prophecy of Rizal that a Filipino of a new type would emerge from this land within a century from the time he wrote it. This New Filipino prophesied by Rizal in his “The Philippines: A Century Hence” about a century ago has now risen full blown from the loam of history. He has taken command of our nation’s destiny in various spheres of life. The new Filipino man brims over with the creative and purposeful spirit, sees problems not as obstacles but as opportunities for achievement, eagerly engages problems and challenges, and views the future as a challenge of greatness."
"266","The New Filipino symbolizes the extinction of Juan Tamad as the undeserved archetype of the Filipino race and the emergence of a new type of Filipino more competent, more confident, more eager for challenge and achievement than all his ancestors before him. In this respect, he eclipses the pre-Spanish Filipinos whom Morga praised for their courage, industry, and independence before colonialism corrupted and enfeebled their spirit. And he matches the vision and the independence with which his ancestors, in 1898, founded the FirstRepublic in the history of Asia as well as the courage of the defenders of Bataan, Corregidor, and the resistance movement."
"267","The experience of the past three years, combining a number of small and big breakthroughs in our national life, shows that the central factor for our progress is still the Filipino; that the Filipino transformed means a nation transformed; that the limit of what we can achieve for ourselves are fundamentally a matter of character—a moral and spiritual limitation."
"268","Although the achievements in rice production, education, and industrialization have an undeniable material basis, their common significance is moral and spiritual. They represent, above all, a transformation of the Filipino spirit, from defeatism, sloth, and self-deprecation, to a new level of energy, self-esteem, and the will to achieve our goals."
"269","This spiritual and intellectual transformation is the New Filipinism."
"270","The New Filipinism represents the discipline and the ethic of independence. It seeks the substance rather than the shadow of freedom. It develops independence beyond formality to reality."
"271","Under the influence of this spirit, we have started to reexamine our own narrow outlook on ourselves and the world; we have ceased to think of ourselves as a small and insignificant nation, a nonentity in world affairs; we have started to reexamine the time-honored postulates by which we lived during the past 500 years, and have lifted up our eyes to wider horizons and more ambitious and peremptory goals."
"272","In the foreseeable future, this new spirit will prompt us to reexamine our own basic institutions and perhaps recast them to make more responsive to the needs of our people. We must not hesitate, from a sense of racial timidity, to change what should be changed. From hereon, we should be guided only by our own sense of what will advance, protect, and fulfill our national interest."
"273","We must aim at the reality rather than at the formality of democracy. Political and social institutions that merely perpetuate entrenched privileges based on the accident of birth must be remolded or replaced with new ones that promote genuine democracy. I am sure the need for such profound changes may well give the forthcoming Constitutional Convention its greatest challenge."
"274","We must not be afraid of innovation in our social, economic, political, and cultural life. The New Filipinism is a call for innovation—a revolution directed against the sterile and self-defeating traditions and habits of the race but without bloodshed and without fratricide."
"275","The New Filipinism is the courage to open up new worlds of opportunity and fulfillment for this and future generations."
"276","The New Filipinism is, ultimately, a call to greatness. But any form of greatness must begin with an act of will. In the past three years, we—the nation together—performed this act of will and unleashed energies that are now transforming this country."
"277","We have accordingly set off powerful trends towards national progress that promise to be irreversible, that will be independent of the accidents of leadership and the vicissitudes of parties in the future. It is our conviction that these trends are now so firmly established, future administrations will owe the momentum of their own programs to them, and will be powerless to reverse them."
"278","Transformed by the New Filipinism, the Filipino people will no longer return to the sterility, mediocrity, and timidity of the past. The new spirit of achievement will be indestructible, and will fashion, in time, a great nation of Asia."
"279","I have given expression to some ideas that may be bold and unorthodox. But they are the ideas that will guide us through new and unexplored terrain. They are not mere verbalizations; they were distilled from the fads and realities that impinge on our national life. They constitute, therefore, our strategy for meeting the problems and events of our time."
"280","There are those among us who will oppose—probably violently—these ideas. Let us hear them out. The democratic dialogue must be preserved. The clash of ideas is the glory and the safeguard of democracy."
"281","My countrymen: We have reached a turning point in our history. The choice is yours. Shall we venture into this brave new world, bright with possibilities, or retreat to the safety of our familiar but sterile past?"
"282","I am for crossing the frontier."
"283","Thank you."
