"","x"
"1","“Let’s Seize the Moment!” "
"2","Mr. Senate President; Mr. Speaker of the House; ladies and gentlemen of Congress; Your Excellencies; special guests; mahal na kababayan:"
"3","Noong isang taon, ang ating mga kababayan ay naghahangad ng panibagong pagsisimula. Ngayon, tapatan nating masasabi na nabigyan natin ang ating bansa ng bagong pag-asa."
"4","A year ago, our people asked of us a new beginning."
"5","Today, we can truly claim we have given our country that fresh start."
"6","We have arrested the decline—of the economy and the national spirit—which had so demoralized our people."
"7","We are concluding a just and honorable peace with the military rebels, the insurgents, and the southern secessionists."
"8","A new spirit of cooperation existing between Congress and the presidency has avoided the gridlock which obstructed policy making in previous administrations. And this is as it should be. Executive and legislature are not meant to function in confrontation with each other."
"9","Our investors and businessmen can almost take political stability for granted once again. The stock market index has reached a record high."
"10","Analyzing our situation in April, the World Bank noted:"
"11","The Philippines now faces its best prospect for sustained development in almost two decades. A window of opportunity exists for the new government."
"12","This optimism about our prospects is not unusual. It is shared by many—here and abroad. But “a window of opportunity” is only that. A momentary opening—which can close sooner than we expect."
"13","Ladies and gentlemen of Congress:"
"14","I invite you to join me in taking advantage of this opportunity and to seize the decisive moment together."
"15","This is the challenge to leadership. Everywhere the old politics is in disfavor—because it has failed to respond to the transformations taking place in the world."
"16","We must learn new ways of looking at the world. We need new answers to our problems. In this spirit, we offer a strategic framework for Philippine development."
"17","Compare the Philippine State with the East Asian dragons. The East Asian States are able to assert their countries’ strategic interests because they are relatively free from the influence of pressure groups. The Philippine State, in the past, had been unable to act consistently in the national interest because it could not resist the importunings of oligarchic groups. And the economy had been governed largely by politics instead of markets."
"18","Because of this experience, we now know that development cannot take place in our country unless we put our house in order. And this—to me—means accomplishing three things: One, restoring political and civic stability. Two, opening the economy: dismantling monopolies and cartels injurious to the public interest, and leveling the playing field of enterprise. Three, addressing the problem of corruption and criminality."
"19","These three tasks—once completed—shall secure the environment for self-sustaining growth—and enable the government to positively and consistently act in the national interest."
"20","Our strategic framework to establish effective government—of putting our house in order—so that our drive for development can begin—we call “Philippines 2000.”"
"21","“Philippines 2000” has two components."
"22","The first is the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan for 1993-1998 [MTPDP 93-98]. Guided by the principles of people empowerment and global excellence, it proposes specific policies and programs to stimulate economic activity and mobilize the entrepreneurial spirit in ordinary Filipinos. I strongly urge your approval of this medium-term Philippine development plan."
"23","The second component of “Philippines 2000” addresses the larger environment—the political, social, and cultural climate—in which economic growth must take place."
"24","The crucial question is: Can we reform an undemocratic economy by using a democratic political framework?"
"25","Authoritarianism eased the way to economic power and higher living standards for our East Asian neighbors. In contrast, we are working to reconcile our democratic politics with an oligarchic economy left over from the colonial period—not by changing the political system, but by democratizing the economy."
"26","The time for authoritarianism has passed—in our country and in the world. Instead of the discipline of command, we must invoke the self-discipline of civic responsibility."
"27","We Filipinos have always accepted that people with more are obliged to help people with less—in the name of a common, compassionate humanity. This traditional moral code we shall make a principle of public policy."
"28","The few who have can never be secure in their possessions for as long as they live among so many who have not. Let me now take up our most urgent sectoral concerns one by one."
"29","Today, new plants are operating and others are under construction. The economy will soon have the power needed for growth. The power crisis is on its way to resolution because of the united actions of Congress and the executive branch. This is where our strength lies, in unity of purpose and harmony of actions. But these alone will not be sufficient for the economy to be strong and resilient for global competition. We therefore also have introduced reforms to restructure the system in favor of efficiency away from protecting the inefficient. We will continue policies of sound monetary management and containment of public sector deficits to ensure that private sector enterprise will invest, expand production, generate employment, and realize fair returns, particularly for exporters. As the power crisis eases, and as we carry out structural reforms, the economy should accelerate. The indicators are increasingly hopeful, such as:"
"30","Let us recognize that an economy controlled by rent-seekers cannot produce free competition and efficiency. The economy must be open to all who bring in new capital, new knowledge, new ideas, and new levels of efficiency. We must broaden the base of economic participation. Let us, therefore, make this Ninth Congress the instrument to free and democratize our economy. By all means, let us join hands in an economic summit—the sooner, the better."
"31","We have to increase revenues to cover current shortfalls and fund public expenditures."
"32","Our tax base has been eroded by proliferation of exemptions, infirmities of tax laws, deficiencies in collections, and widespread evasion. Tax exemptions, while well meant, are often abused by the underserving. The revenues lost from the exemptions have escalated from P3.3 billion in 1986 to P25 billion in 1992—or two-thirds of the capital budget of the national government for 1993. This amount does not even include exemptions which have not been monitored."
"33","So let us review existing exemption laws and replace them for those deserving beneficiaries with direct budget support—so that the whole system will be transparent, accountable, and manageable."
"34","We also have to cure infirmities in tax laws—such as deductions for married couples with joint incomes."
"35","In your last session, this Congress passed laws to strengthen the enforcement powers of our revenue agencies. For these I am truly grateful."
"36","I have ordered both Commissioners of Internal Revenue and of Customs to use these powers to go relentlessly after evaders, smugglers, and dishonest collectors."
"37","I am convinced that citizens will faithfully comply with their tax obligations if there are no free riders on their backs. But because of existing contractual obligations, the payoff from tax reforms may not be sufficient to finance the needs of development. I therefore ask the support of Congress for a new revenue package for urgent enactment. This will widen the tax base and rationalize the existing structure."
"38","Reforms in tax administration must aim to achieve simplicity, uniformity, and efficiency. This is the best way to arrest the present epidemic of tax avoidance and evasion."
"39","Growth cannot take place without some sacrifice from everyone of us. But let us agree that the tax burden must fall heaviest on those who can best bear it."
"40","But we must not tax at levels that will become a drag on the economy. Consequently, I also ask your help to tap other public funds in special and trust accounts, such as those of the Philippine Tourism Authority and the duty-free shop, and make these available for our budget program. The law creating the Central Monetary Authority adds to the heavy demands on scarce fiscal resources that cannot be entirely covered by additional tax revenues."
"41","For our part, we will accelerate sales of public assets and shares in private corporations, and get government out of the business of the private sector. I therefore ask you to extend the life of the committee on privatization and the asset privatization trust, which otherwise will end this year."
"42","I also urge Congress to set guidelines for the Presidential Commission on Good Government in making compromise settlements on ill-gotten wealth cases—on terms fair to the government and only with those who have demonstrated commitment to help in the development of our country."
"43","My vision of a tax system is a broad-based one with just a few exemptions and at rates that yield no premium to tax evasion, where all enterprises and citizens carry their equitable share."
"44","We now have a real opportunity to secure a fair share of the investments flowing into the ASEAN region. What is important is that we continue to improve our country’s attractiveness for investments—by emphasizing our comparative advantage."
"45","And we will redouble our efforts to disperse industries to the countryside with emphasis on the small and medium enterprises."
"46","The former military baselands—which were the cause of so much concern on the departure of the U.S. military—have now become attractive sites for economic expansion."
"47","Subic has become one of our brightest areas for foreign investment. Similarly, we have been able to move substantially to transform Clark Air Base and Camp John Hay from calamity areas to growth centers."
"48","We can then free some 3 million hectares now devoted to marginal rice and corn growing to other uses—to pasture, to aquaculture, and to high-value crops. These efforts in agriculture must be matched by equally resolute efforts at agrarian reform. This reform has been often pledged, but only half-heartedly redeemed."
"49","My administration has stepped up the pace of the CARP implementation. During this first year, we have acquired, distributed and titled some 382,000 hectares, with nearly a quarter of a million farmers benefited. This is 41% of all land titles distributed by the Department of Agrarian Reform during the last 30 years."
"50","But you and I know agrarian reform is more than just the redistribution of land. We have therefore taken decisive steps also to ensure that the land remains productive for farmers. We increased agricultural support services and livelihood assistance to CARP beneficiaries. We encouraged them to organize cooperatives and to take advantage of economies of scale to enhance their productivity."
"51","Last year we launched 257 agrarian reform communities [ARCs] nationwide—with at least one in each congressional district in the countryside—where farmer-beneficiaries can better feel the impact of localized support services in terms of higher incomes."
"52","Our goal is to have 1,000 of these ARCs of progress by 1998. This is not enough, however, for the kind of rural transformation that we seek. We have to conserve agricultural lands. That is why our tax package includes a land conversion tax."
"53","Tourist arrivals reached 1.15 million in 1992—up by nearly 200,000 compared to 1991. These generated tourist receipts of some $1.7 billion, an increase of 30.6% over the previous year’s."
"54","Tourism arrangements made with our ASEAN neighbors and new tourism estate development will boost our earnings from this source."
"55","Since the funding for our infrastructure development needs is immense, I propose the amendment of the Build-Operate-Transfer law to encourage greater participation from private capital. Such participation must now be motivated by risk reward for efficiency and without the guarantee of government."
"56","In energy, the dark time is almost over. By year-end, we shall have added 900 megawatts to the Luzon grid. This should—once and for all—put an end to the brownouts in households in Luzon."
"57","By the second half of 1994, we shall have reliable power service for industry."
"58","In the Visayas, power has been adequate, and projects are ongoing to be sure that no deficiency occurs."
"59","In Mindanao, the National Power Corporation has just announced the complete restoration of power normalcy effective today."
"60","In rural electrification, we have energized 94% of all our towns and cities, and 63% of our barangays. But we should strive harder so that more of our countrymen shall have electricity. There are bills in Congress which we support to strengthen the NEA to enable it to carry out its mission better."
"61","We continue to develop geothermal energy—a competitively priced, indigenous, and environment-friendly option. PNOC’s additional plants between now and 1998 will increase baseload geothermal capacity by 150%. More geothermal resources must be found. We therefore urge Congress to enact the Geothermal Bill to encourage more exploration."
"62","Our development program in power is indeed designed to provide comprehensively for our industrial future."
"63","So while we still can, we must seek growth that does not exploit our country’s natural wealth. Thus, we strongly uphold our commitment to the Rio Declaration and Agenda 21—which is the global blueprint for sustainable development."
"64","Over the past year, we banned logging in virgin forests, and restricted harvesting to second-growth timber. We continue to pursue a no-nonsense campaign against illegal loggers."
"65","We strictly enforced the interim guidelines on land use conversion to preserve prime agricultural land."
"66","We initiated the use of low-lead and sulfur-free gasoline."
"67","And we closed down Smokey Mountain while providing alternative livelihood options for its residents."
"68","Nevertheless, we need to provide an environmental protection outlook on old and new problems. We are therefore submitting new codes covering mining, land management, forestry, and fishery. In addition, we need laws to improve solid waste management and to set up a nationwide potable water program for our communities."
"69","One of my first moves was to issue Memorandum Order No. 27, ordering all departments and agencies to eliminate duplication of functions, achieve greater cost-effectiveness, and rechannel resources to priority projects."
"70","But our efforts have been hampered by multiple barriers to change—which are, ironically, engraved in the civil service law. Although it was not so intended, the civil service law sometimes acts as a brake on efforts at reform."
"71","It is time we addressed this issue together. Give me the authority to reorganize the bureaucracy—and I assure you that we shall achieve the kind of organization required for efficient, effective, and quality administration."
"72","By the same token, let us recognize that an efficient bureaucracy depends on decently paid civil servants. I ask Congress to amend our existing compensation laws—so that government can begin to attract into and retain talent in the service—especially from among our best and brightest."
"73","The most urgent problem is how to deal with our clogged dockets, with over 300,000 undecided cases in our Regional Trial Courts alone."
"74","And so, instead of just blaming our judges for the delay, let us find practical ways of helping them along. Thus, I urge the passage of laws which will relieve the Supreme Court of the burden of reviewing decisions of certain administrative agencies. Likewise, the jurisdiction of the municipal trial courts can be broadened. And we should also strengthen the barangay justice system and pass the Legal Education Reform bill and the proposal for an academy for judges and prosecutors."
"75","The establishment of this academy is part of our program of professionalizing our prosecution service. One must now pass a qualifying examination as part of the requirements for entry into the national prosecution service. The performance of our prosecutors’ field offices is now monitored and evaluated on a quarterly basis."
"76","For a more focused rehabilitation of our prisoners, we are now reviewing a program to regionalize our prison system, which will also free a vast and valuable asset in Muntinlupa."
"77","The expectations are high in our local communities because more resources, powers and responsibilities have been devolved to local governments. But the objectives of the Local Government Code of 1991 will be realized only with the proper use of these powers by local authorities."
"78","We need to correct the law so that the mismatches in internal revenue allocations and the cost of devolved functions, which have disadvantaged some local government units, will be solved."
"79","Effective governance will depend on the harmony of actions between national and local governments as well as among local governments themselves. Inconsistencies in their respective areas will disrupt day to day affairs of commerce and economic life. Devolved powers have to be exercised judiciously without conflict with national policies. And the use of resources has to be subject to the same discipline of prudence and accountability. The national government will extend assistance in enhancing the management capabilities of local authorities."
"80","It is time we fully harnessed this precious asset to bring about greater productivity and social cohesion."
"81","Government has committed itself squarely to a family planning program based on choice—and with the goal of bringing down the growth rate to under 2% by 1998."
"82","For this, education and advocacy are our principal tools. And we look to partnership with the private sector and nongovernment organizations in reaching out to our people."
"83","We must achieve an appropriate growth and distribution of our population consistent with sustainable development. We must reduce—and eventually reverse—migration into cities and uplands and thereby check the congestion in our major urban centers and environmental degradation in our uplands."
"84","Education reform must also develop a curriculum strong in science, mathematics, and languages. It must include the enhancement of the conditions of teachers—in both their livelihood and their work."
"85","Vocational education and technical training should keep to their basic purpose, which is to prepare young people for worthwhile jobs, and to teach new technologies that our economy needs."
"86","College- and university-level education should focus on developing competent professionals and on nurturing a culture of scientific excellence."
"87","We will expand the public school network to the rural barangays which are still without public elementary schools, and all municipalities still without any high school, public or private."
"88","All these require fundamental reorientation of our values and a continuing review of our education and training policies."
"89","In particular, government has implemented new policies and programs to increase life expectancy by extensive immunization, improved nutrition, and environmental sanitation."
"90","The challenge is to ensure continued investments in low-cost housing through stable financing and by devising new and imaginative arrangements that will maximize the private sector’s role."
"91","I will certify to Congress a bill that makes contributions to Pag-IBIG mandatory beyond a certain salary ceiling and taps other sources for socialized housing. This will help raise funds for the housing effort."
"92","The visits I have been making to our neighbors are meant to signal the priority we are giving to ASEAN and the larger Asia-Pacific region."
"93","With the United States, we are entering a new era based on partnership and cooperation—while further strengthening our relationships with Europe and the countries of the Middle East."
"94","Now more than ever, we must place our diplomacy in the service of our economy and our external security."
"95","Our foreign missions have focused on attracting investments, developing export markets, promoting tourism; gathering economic information, and facilitating the inflow of development aid."
"96","In cooperation with our partners in ASEAN, we are promoting confidence-building measures among the claimants to the disputed areas of the South China Sea. And we are taking part in our cooperative arrangements to advance regional security."
"97","In addition to our preferential trade arrangements, we in ASEAN have also come together to give our six countries the economic weight, the cultural variety, the talent pool, the technological resilience, and the attractiveness to investors that we need to become a major player in the world."
"98","We must make sure that growth is broad-based and socially equitable—that growth leaves no social group behind."
"99","Particularly vulnerable are our marginalized sectors—subsistence farmers and agricultural workers, marginal fishermen, cultural communities, the elderly, the disabled, the street children, the urban underclass of unskilled workers, squatters, and their families."
"100","The economy’s return to growth shall by itself help ease poverty. But we shall also be needing focused, targeted, and specific safety nets for these vulnerable groups. We are therefore partial to policies and programs that encourage community organizing to attain self-reliance for the poor communities. And we will match their self-organizing initiatives with more social expenditures, food and education subsidies, rural credit, and livelihood programs."
"101","All of these we should do. We cannot leave our poor to wait for the benefits from economic growth to trickle down to where they are."
"102","In closing, let me declare that I do believe we have started creating the conditions for self-sustaining growth. We can end once and for all, by our cooperative efforts, the cycles of boom and bust which have characterized our economic performance."
"103","But this much we must realize: reform will not come easy. Some reforms may bring difficult adjustments and even hardships before they do any good. The most we can do is to ensure that reforms hurt least our most vulnerable social groups."
"104","The ultimate truth is that we cannot afford to fail—in our venture of reform and development. The consequences of failure will be grave."
"105","Radical insurgency should never flare up all over again: These last 18 years, it has already cost us 40,000 dead."
"106","The roots of Philippine rebellion lie deeply buried in the poverty, inequality, and injustice of our social system; in the inefficiency, corruption, indifference, and arrogance of those in power. Again and again, the violence of rebellion has broken out—in leftist insurgencies, military mutinies, and separatist movements. We cannot keep using force and violence to suppress these outbreaks. We must try to recognize their root causes so that we can apply lasting solutions. To do that, we must understand how far rebels are motivated by people’s frustrations over their inability to break through the barriers and patterns of oligarchic power that control their lives."
"107","Only then can we redress, once and for all, the imbalance in national society between the few who are rich and the many who are poor. Only then can we make economic growth meaningful to the masses of our people."
"108","We are at a critical hour in our life as a nation. Depending on how we act, our country shall either prosper or falter. Depending on how well we match our words with deeds, our nation shall enter into its second century dragged down by crisis and factionalism—or raised by achievement and pride."
"109","Our history teaches us that the exercise of power must be guided by principle. For power exercised without principle is ruthless, and principle without the exercise of power cannot move our nation forward."
"110","Mga mahal na kababayan, sa tulong at gabay ng ating Panginoon, magsimula na tayong kumilos upang harapin ang dakilang kapalaran na ating inaasam."
"111","Invoking God’s blessings, let us move forward and fulfill our destiny."
"112","Mabuhay ang “Philippines 2000!!!”"
"113","Mabuhay ang Pilipinas !!!"
"114","Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat."
