Thank you very much. Let's sit down all of us.

Speaker Feliciano Belmonte; Senate President Juan Ponce Enrile; Vice President Jejomar C. Binay; Chief Justice Renato Corona; Former Presidents Fidel Valdez Ramos and Joseph Ejercito Estrada; members of the House of Representatives and the Senate; distinguished members of the diplomatic corps; my fellow workers in government;

My beloved countrymen:

At every moment of management we are faced with a crossroad.

On the one hand is the choice for the benefit of the people. Interesting view of the multitude; adherence to principle; and the sincerity of our sworn calling as a servant. This is the straight path.

On the other hand is the priority of self interest. Servitude to political considerations, and sacrifices of the people's welfare. This is the crooked road.

The government has long gone astray in the long distances. Every day, the area of ​​our problem is increasingly clear to me. I feel the weight of my responsibility.

In the first three weeks of our term, we have discovered many. I want to tell you just a few of our problems and what we are doing to solve them.

It's just a glance; this is not all the problems we face. The people are hiding and deliberately misleading the real situation of our country.

In the first six months of the year, the government is spending more than just investing in income. Our deficit has grown significantly, reaching 196.7 billion pesos. At the target, we lost 23.8 billion pesos; The estimated cost, we have exceeded 45.1 billion pesos.

The budget for 2010 was 1.54 trillion pesos.

At least 100 billion pesos or 6.5 percent of the total is available for free for the remaining six months of this year.

Almost 1 percent of the total budget is left for each month.

Where did you bring the money?

The Calamity Fund allocated 2 billion pesos in preparation for disasters that have not yet occurred. This fund is very small, but we have just arrived at the time of the flood and storm, 1.4 billion pesos or 70 percent spent.

A total of 108 million pesos for the province of Pampanga, its 105 million pesos went to only one district. Meanwhile, the province of Pangasinan devastated by Pepeng received only 5 million pesos for damage caused by typhoon Cosme, which occurred in 2008.

The Pampanga fund was given during the election month, seven months after Ondoy and Pepeng. What if you get home tomorrow? Its funding has been exhausted for a year ago. The future is paying for the greed of the past.

The same goes for the MWSS fund [Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System]. Recently, people have just begun to get water. Despite this, MWSS leadership still has to pay self-esteem despite the pension of retired employees.

In 2009, the entire MWSS payroll was 51.4 million pesos. But it is not just their paycheck; they have additional allowances and benefits of up to 160.1 million pesos. In short, they received 211.5 million pesos last year. It costs only about one percent of the normal wage, and 66 percent more.

The average worker is up to 13th month pay plus cash gifts only. At MWSS, the wage equivalent of more than 30 months plus all the bonuses and allowances they have earned.

We find out more about the wages of their Board of Trustees. Let's look at the allowances they receive:

Just sit in the Board of Trustees and Board Committee meeting, 14,000. It will reach 98,000 this month. They still have grocery incentives of 80,000 per year.

Not only that: there is mid-year bonus, productivity bonus, anniversary bonus, year-end bonus, and financial assistance. There is a Christmas bonus, with an additional Christmas package. Each of these, 98,000.

In total, all 2.5 million pesos per year will be made per Board member other than trade, technical assistance, and loans. I will repeat. All of this they gave to themselves while pensions of their retirees have not been paid.

La Mesa Watershed also did not forgive them. To get the right water supply, it is necessary to take care of the watersheds. In the watershed, the need is full. It was also a must-have tree, they built a house for high-ranking MWSS officials.

They will not be immediately removed because they are among the Midnight Appointees of former President Arroyo. We are investigating all of this. If they still have some shame left over there-maybe They just left home. [Applause]

Let's talk about infrastructure funding. The DPWH [Department of Public Works and Highways] identified 246 priority safety projects funded by the Motor Vehicle Users Charge. It will require a budget of 425 million pesos.

Funded, only 28 projects. The 218 projects have been forgotten and replaced with 70 projects that are out of the plan. The demanded 425 million pesos, being 480 million pesos, grew primarily due to projects of selected beneficiaries.

These projects are useless, untrustworthy, and unprepared, so it seems like a good thing.

It's time for it. In our administration, no city-town, no tongpats, the money of the people will be spent only for the people. [Applause]

We have yet to find out. Five days before the end of the term of the previous administration, they are issuing a 3.5 billion pesos for the rehabilitation of Ondoy and Pepeng's victims.

Forty-six projects have to be allocated so that they can not go public bidding. Ninety-nine million pesos worth of these items were almost gone. The Special Allotment Release Order has not yet been issued has been signed.

It was a matter of fact that Secretary Rogelio Singson was discovered and stopped by the DPWH. Now, the total amount of 3.5 billion pesos will be passed on to the bidders' bidding, and this fund will be available to give the losers to homeowners because of Ondoy and Pepeng. [Applause]

Let's talk about what happened to NAPOCOR [National Power Corporation]. In 2001 to 2004, the government forced the NAPOCOR to sell electricity at the expense of not increasing the price. The reason is: they are preparing for the election.

As a result, in 2004, the debt burden of the NAPOCOR was too high. The national government is forced to answer its 200 billion pesos debt.

What people think they save on electricity are also paid out of the people's treasury. We have the cost of electricity, we still pay the extra debt of the government.

If the loan was sober, we would have increased our supply of electricity. But the decision is based on false politics, and not the needs of the people. The people, after sacrificing more torture.

This is what happened with MRT [Metro Rail Transit]. We have tried to buy our love. The operator was forced to keep the fare low.

The guarantees provided by the operator are not performing properly so that they can recover their investment. As a result, the Land Bank and the Development Bank of the Philippines have ordered the purchase of the MRT.

The money of the people, switched to an intolerable operation.

We have come to the NFA [National Food Authority] fund.

In 2004: the supply shortage of the Philippines was 117,000 metric tons. They bought, 900 thousand metric tons. Even if you repeat more than seven times the shortcomings, they still have a lot to buy.

In 2007: the supply shortage in the Philippines was 589,000 metric tons. They bought, 1.827 million metric tons. Even if you repeat more than three times the shortcomings, they have bought more.

What is so painful, because they buy a lot from year to year, the rice is only rotting rice, just as it did in 2008.

Is not this the crime, which lets them rot the rice, despite the 4 million Filipinos who do not eat three times a day?

As a result, NFA's debt has reached 171.6 billion pesos in May this year.

This discard, could almost fund the following:

The budget of the whole Hudikatura, which is 12.7 billion pesos this year.

Conditional Cash Transfers for the next year, worth 29.6 billion pesos.

All the classrooms our country needs, worth 130 billion pesos.

This behavior is disgusting. Money already, it's still rock.

You heard how the people's treasuries were wasted. What is clear now is: Any change will come from ensuring that the ending and luxury will end.

So far from now: we've been stopping money from the people's money. [Applause] We will remove the wrong projects.

This is the point of what we call zero-based approach to our budget. The trend is that the budget is over and over again every year. Just added a little, it can be.

Next month we will make a budget that correctly identifies the problems, and will focus on the right solution.

These are just a few of our findings. Here are some examples of the steps we take.

There is the case of a pawn shop. He bought The car is estimated at 26 million pesos.

If you can buy a Lamborghini, why can not you pay a tax?

The case was filed. Under the leadership of Finance Secretary Cesar Purisima, Justice Secretary Leila de Lima, BIR [Bureau of Internal Revenue] Commissioner Kim Henares and Customs Commissioner Lito Alvarez, [applause] every week we have a new case filed against smugglers and those who are not paying the right taxes. [Applause]

The guilty was also identified with the cases of Francisco Baldomero, Jose Daguio and Miguel Belen, three of the six incidents of extralegal killings since the time we sat.

About a percentage of incidents of extralegal killings that have taken place in the short term of our time have come to their resolution.

The rest of the half will not end up persecuting until justice is reached. [Applause]

We will pay the murderers. We will also be responsible for corrupt governments.

Our Truth Commission, headed by former Chief Justice Hilario Davide, has started. [Applause] We will find the truth about the alleged corruption in the last nine years.

Within this week, I will sign the first Executive Order designating the Truth Commission.

If the answer to injustice is a responsibility, the answer to our lack of funding is innovative and creative ways to address the problematic issues.

There are so many needs: from education, infrastructure, health, military and police needs, and much more. The funds are not enough to cover all of them.

No matter how much deficiency to fill our list of needs, I am still a member of the community because there have been many new interests and confidence in the Philippines.

This will be the solution: Public-Private Partnerships. No matter what the signature is happening here, I can say that it is good to be the result of many of these issues.

Some of them showed interest, wanting to build an expressway from Manila, from Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, Nueva Vizcaya, to the end of the Cagayan Valley [applause] without spending a month even before the peso.

In the field of our Armed Forces:

We have 36,000 nautical miles shore. We only have: 32 ships. These ships, Gen. MacArthur. [Laughter]

Someone suggested us, this is the proposition: they will rent the Navy's headquarters at Roxas Boulevard and the Naval Station in Fort Bonifacio.

They answered the transfer of the Navy Headquarters to Camp Aguinaldo. Immediately, we will be given 100 million dollars. And in addition to that, they will bring us more income from the businesses they will build on their land.

Soon you say: We get what we need, not to spend, we will still be. [Applause]

Many have offered and suggested us, from local to foreign entrepreneurs, who have had different needs.

From these Public-Private Partnerships, our economy will grow, and every Filipino will benefit. There are so many sectors it can help.

We can build the infrastructure we need to grow tourism.

In agriculture, we can build grains terminals, refrigeration facilities, good road networks and postharvest facilities.

If we can fix our food supply chain with the help of the private sector, instead of importing we can hope to supply the world market.

If the proposed railway system is to be built, the price will go down. Travelers are cheaper, faster, more convenient, and even able to avoid coin cops and attack rebels. [Applause]

Just ask: Our job is the first stage in creating jobs, and job growth comes from industry. The industry will only grow if we make the process for business owners more clean, faster, and more convenient.

We will speed up the process of projects under Build-Operate-Transfer. With the help of all branches of government and the people, we will reduce the process for six months to a decade.

There are also steps taken by DTI [Department of Trade and Industry], led by Secretary Gregory Domingo:

The endless recurring process of registering the name of the company, every quarter takes up to four to eight hours, we will be lowered by 15 minutes. [Applause]

The former list of 36 documents, we will be down to 6. The former eight page application form, we will lower one page.

I call on our LGUs [local government units]. While we are looking for more To make businesses more open, they should also study their processes. It needs to be faster, and it needs to be aligned with our sources of reform.

Entrepreneurs, soldiers, rebels, and ordinary Filipinos, all benefit from it. Filipinos are just not at a disadvantage, let's just let them go. [Applause] We need to start working together to achieve it. Let us not abuse one another.

The time is coming when we no longer have to choose between the safety of our people or the future of your children.

It is time to implement this Public-Private Partnerships, to fund social services, in accordance with our platform.

We hope to implement our education plans.

We can expand the basic education cycle from a very short 10 years to a global standard of 12 years.

We will increase the classrooms. We can fund service contracting under GASTPE [Government Assistance to Students and Teachers in Private Education].

Also, conditional cash transfers, which will reduce the burden on family pockets, will also leave the fund.

Our PhilHealth plan can be implemented.

First, we will identify the true number of those who need it. At the moment, data is not compatible. PhilHealth says in one mouth, 87 percent is covered. On the other hand, 53 percent. According to the National Statistics Office, 38 percent have coverage.

Today, Secretary Dinky Soliman and the DSWD are in the process of implementing the National Household Targetting System, which will identify families that need more help. Approximately 9 billion are needed to provide PhilHealth with the 5 million poorest Filipino families.

We are very good at our future. We are in the private sector, and we are with the League of Provinces, led by Governor Alfonso Umali along with Governor L-Ray Villafuerte and Governor Icot Petilla. It is ready to cooperate to participate in financing expenses. I also know that the League of Cities will be replaced by Mayor Oscar Rodriguez. [Applause]

If local governments are sympathetic to our aspirations, Congress will come from me, maybe I can expect them too. [Applause]

The cabinet makes its way into identifying our problems and launching solutions within just three weeks.

When it was Basyang storm, our franchisees told us, four days without electricity. Due to rapid action by Secretary Rene Almendras and the Department of Energy, most of the power restored in just 24 hours. [Applause]

It is said that the water shortage in Metro Manila, immediately by Secretary Rogelio Singson and DPWH. He no longer waited for the order, thus reducing the peril.

We have also seen the enthusiasm of our designated assistants to the Cabinet. It is reasonable to expect that they will no longer be subject to the needle's eye to confirm the Commission on Appointments. If this happens, many of the better Filipinos will be able to serve the government.

Soon, we will sit at the LEDAC [Legislative Executive Development Advisory Council] and talk about the important laws that we have to pass. You can expect to keep my mind open, and our relationship will remain faithful. [Applause]

We are advancing the Fiscal Responsibility Bill, where we will not pass a law that will require funding if its source has not yet been defined. There are 104.1 billion pesos that we need to fund laws that have passed, but are not enforced.

We must also arrange fiscal incentives given in the past. Now that we are tightening the belt, it is important to check which of these should stay and what should be stopped.

We do not agree to have another NBN-ZTE. Whether local or foreign money is due, it must go through the proper process. I ask for your help to amend our Procurement Law.

According to the Constitution, it is the duty of the state to make sure that there is no market demand. Monopolies are prohibited, it is unlawful for cartels to compete in the competition. We need an Anti-Trust Law that will give life to these principles. This will provide opportunities for Small- and Medium-scale Enterprises to participate and contribute to the growth of our economy.

Let us forward the National Land Use Bill.

Firstly, the National Defense Act became a law of the Commonwealth, which was passed in 1935. It was supposed to replace the law in response to the need for national security dad currently.

I would like to extend the Whistleblower's Bill to continue to dispel the culture of fear and silence. [Applause]

The Witness Protection Program will further strengthen. We recall that from 2009 to 2010, there were 95 per cent of cases in which a witness was subjected to this program.

We have to review our laws. I would like to commence that the record of our laws, to make sure they are compatible and not in conflict.

These laws are the basis of order, but the foundation of everything we do is the principle we can not reach without peace and tranquility.

The two issues we face in terms of peace: the situation in Mindanao, and the continuing revolt of the CPP-NPA-NDF [Communist Party of the Philippines-New People's Army-National Democratic Front].

About the situation in Mindanao: Our views do not change. [Applause] Peace and tranquility can only come to terms with all those who are affected: Moro, Lumad, and Christians. We have appointed Dean Marvic Leonen to oversee our ongoing conversation with the MILF [Moro Islamic Liberation Front].

We will avoid mistakes that happened in the previous administration, where the people of Mindanao are justified. [Applause] We can not fool the process of politics, and not the welfare of the people as the only interest.

We recognize the steps taken by the MILF by dividing their ranks. We expect the negotiations to begin again after Ramadan. [Applause]

About CPP-NPA-NDF: Are you ready to take concrete suggestions, instead of just criticisms? [Applause]

If you want peace, we are ready for a massive ceasefire. Are you ready too? Let's talk. [Applause]

The talk is difficult to start when there is a smell of gunpowder in the air. I call: do not let this wonderful opportunity be happy to gather under a single objective.

Peace and tranquility are the foundation of development. As the shooting continues, our bonding continues.

We should also be aware: This is a time of sacrifice. And this sacrifice will be the investment for our future. Combined with our rights and freedoms is our duty to neighbor and to the people.

I hope that our friends in the media, especially on the radio and in print, on time-locking, and in community newspapers, will be the only ones watching over your range.

The basic principles of your vocation should be lifelong: to clarify important issues; to be fair and truthful; and raise the level of public discourse. [Applause]

It is the duty of every Filipino to focus on the leaders who are also the ones who sit in place. Step forward from tampering to participation. Because interfering, the complaint is infinite. Participating, participating in the solution. [Applause]

It is a long way to predict that the key to learning is to concentrate on oneself rather than understanding others. Clear to me: How can we cope with the benefits of others?

Who is not given a chance to study, how to get a job? If we do not have jobs, how are we supposed to be consumers? How to save money?

But if we reverse the point of view-if we think, "I will increase my fellow's ability" -that will result, and everyone will have the opportunity. [Applause]

We have a good start. And the better we can get. But let's not forget that there are those who desire not to succeed. Because when we do not succeed, they can return to power, and to exploit the people. [Applause]

It is my belief that God and people are bringing us now. As we focus on the welfare of our neighbors, blessings and guidance are sure to depend on God. And when we believe that our companions are God, do we have nothing to do?

The mandate we get in the last election is proof that the Filipino is still dependent on change. The situation is really different. Can you dream again? [Applause] Let us go to the fulfillment of our dreams.

Thank you very much. Good afternoon to everyone.

