Senate President Juan Ponce Enrile; Speaker Feliciano Belmonte; Vice President Jejomar Binay; former President Fidel Valdez Ramos and Joseph Ejercito Estrada; Chief Justice Renato Corona and our respected magistrate of the Supreme Court; honored members of the diplomatic corps; members of the House of Representatives and the Senate; local government officials; members of our Cabinet; unified members of the military and police; my fellow men serve the people;

And to my beloved countrymen, my good Boss:

I was in front of you when I was inaugurated and said: There is nothing in our administration. And now, we keep stopping it. It has become a signal and a symbol of change, not just on the road, but also in the minds of society.

For a long time, the smell became a symbol of abuse. Previously, if government officials were able to counterflow, it was as if they were just hours. Instead of serving the people, they were as kings of the people. If their masters and negligenters were to spend their money, imagine what nobleman was to break the road; do not care about those who are forced to leave and leave. Those who should serve are the ones who oppress themselves. The best thing to do after serving is that-the brain-sweeping.

They have no right to do this. According to the law, only the President, Vice President, Senate President, House Speaker, Chief Justice, police, fire department, and ambulance are authorized to use the blanket for their official walks. If traffic does not comply with the law, how much more is the amount of money available, such as the apples funded by the people's treasury?

Do you want to confine all the corrupt? Me too. Do you want to get rid of the smell, not just on the road, but in the minds of the crooked system that we endure for a long time? Me too. Do you want to give everybody the right opportunity? Of course I'm also.

Here is an example of our campaign against the system. This year, the people themselves say they have reduced their hunger. Of the 20.5 percent self-rated hunger in March, it dropped to 15.1 percent in June, [applause] equivalent to a million Filipino families who had been hungry before, but now eaten correctly every day.

In the business field, who thinks we have seven times to exceed the all-time high of the stock market? The previous 4,000 indexes are supposed to be inaccessible, or even reaching in the meantime, nowadays, usually exceeded.

If the country has previously been bidders with low credit ratings, Moody's, Standard and Poors, Fitch, and Japan Credit Ratings Agency raise our rankings, recognizing our proper fund raising and our creative finances. High credit rating, reduce interest in the money we borrow. Compared to the first four months of last year, our 23 billion pesos saved interest payments from January to April of 2011. It can answer two million and three thousand thousand beneficiaries of CCT [conditional cash transfer] up to end of 2011. [Applause]

I just remind you, in nine and a half years before we were assigned to the spot, we only once gained ratings upgrade, and six times downgraded by different rating agencies. For one year, we've been upgraded four times. [Applause] We know it's not easy to upgrade at these times. These ratings agencies have criticized the advice before being chastised in America, so they are now more resilient in providing good ratings, and we see it in a series of downgrades to other countries. But we are upgrading them. They all agree: the Philippine economy is better and more prosperous. Just one step, we will reach the investment grade, and our economic team will not stop us from getting involved.

And there's more news going on. Because of the DOE's [Ministry of Energy], the confidence of investors in our energy sector has risen again. This is a proof of the hundred and forty companies that are prepared to bet on the exploration and strengthening of our oil and natural gas resources. In the last energy contracting round in 2006, only 35 participated. Only Friday, signed a new agreement for a new power plant in the Luzon grid to come in 2014, the country has a cheaper and more reliable source of energy.

We have the confidence, the hope, and the fulfillment of our promises. I remember the woman I was talking about when I was first housed -house campaign for me. His supplication: "Whichever win, the consequences will be the same. I was very difficult when they were campaigning; I'm still very poor while they're sitting, and I'm still very hard to find that they're retired. "In other words, the crowd's supplication," The leaders did not care about us yesterday, they do not care now. Tomorrow, they still do not care. "

'Is not he justified in saying this, because of the inclusion of government agencies? Please buy a helicopter at a brand new price, but it's already used. [Applause] Also, dozens of government-owned and -controlled corporations received government receipts, such as the Philippine National Construction Corporation (PNCC), when they did not offer decent services, and have been deployed on their agencies' debt. Prior to their arrival, the PNCC's former leadership comprised thirty-two million pesos on their own. In 2007, they had no franchise; all that is to be earned, should be directed to the national government. No longer earned income, it took advantage of the seats. Their bonus from 2005 to 2009, they have doubled in the first six months of 2010. They have already paid their billions of billions of dollars to their office, they still enjoy midnight bonuses on their own.

In order to prevent the devastation of the people's sacks, we urge and evaluate the programs. For two consecutive years we have implemented zero-based budgeting, which will serve as a shield for futile spending.

In Laguna Lake, they will remove 12 million cubic meters of dredging, but after three years, it is guaranteed to return; 18.7 billion pesos will be our loan for playing mud. The debt is not yet paid, the benefit expires. We prevented that. The food-for-school program is just a search for a beneficiary, and other initiatives that are funded but not addressed-we have already disregarded the budget so that the exempted money will be spent on real-life projects.

Budget is the clearest way to live our straight path. My intentions are to everyone who wants to divert it here: If you're just worried about being poor, do not try. If you own yourself, do not try. If that's not for Filipinos, do not try to.

Hopefully we can say that the brain is finished, but we can see the dilemma of this kind of thought that will lead to the sadness of our trip on the straight path.

It seems that many people are also in the private sector. According to the BIR [Bureau of Internal Revenue], we have around 1.7 million self-employed and professional taxpayers such as lawyers, doctors, and businessmen who paid only, in sumatotal, of 9.8 billion pesos in 2010. 5,783 pesos income tax of each one of them, on average-that is, if it is true, their total income is only 8,500 pesos per month. Minimum wage minimum. Naman. [Applause]

You can see that your taxes are right, so there is no reason to avoid paying. I am calling to you: Not just the government, but our fellow Filipinos are deprived of non-payment of the right taxes.

We are responsible and responsible for the shade of the government. Painful, until these days, someone still tries to get through. There is one district in Region IV-B, with a project costing 300 million pesos. Case up to only 50 million pesos can be approved by district engineer.

So they thought to chop the project so that they did not exceed 50 million pesos, and their papers did not reach the regional and central office. In terms of strategy, our kingdom has seen a situation in the DPWH [Department of Public Works and Highways]. They tried to keep up with their routine. Often, due to fundraising, there is no question of what the plan and project details are. Even if the spider's house is to be built, it will be provided with funds, as long as there is no room for it.

Secretary Babes Singson does not go through it. [Applause] He has removed the district engineer from the spot. It also prevented the award of this project to facilitate any magic that has taken place. Everyone is investigating all the things that are happening. Contracts that prove to be conspicuous to spit on projects, we are blacklisted.

Take a look at the proposed systematic inclusion of the system: The people's continuing prosperity should benefit from the town's project.

That's not all about Region IV-B being discovered. But that it is stopping because it is no longer a matter of course but the proper process takes over the DPWH. There can be no work program; it is necessary to present a thoughtful plan for the implementation of projects without conflict. The bidding is clean and clear, and the opportunity for entering contractors is equal.

In today's DPWH system, we have saved about 2.5 billion pesos, and we expect more than 6 to 7 billion pesos to save this year. The most important thing, we are looking at the roads that are decent, not only to decompose, but also to break down. We believe in the past, it is impossible for the DPWH to correct their system. It is not just possible; in the first year, we are doing it.

Even in the fields, there are also those who are in need. Before joining in 2010, the country imported 2.3 million metric tons of rice. We only need 1.3 million metric tons, but they are still over 1 million tonnes. Because of the overloading, we still need to spend more on the mere fishermen's steamship.

How many years is it worthless to import rice? Consequently, thinking has come to mean that we are always living with rice. What many people think, we can not really do it.

But, in just one year, we proved to be wrong. Now, the former 1.3 million metric tons we lack in rice, are almost parted; 660,000 metric tons is just what we need to do. Even though we add more protection against the disaster and make 860,000 metric tons-that's what we're doing-it is still less than the estimated annual deficit of 1.3 million metric tons.

And it's not just about spending our rice productivity. It benefits from healthy practices: the use of fine seed varieties, and careful and cost effective irrigation. This last year, 11,611 new hectares of farmland are being cultivated. It is also more than 212,000 hectares that have been repaired or rehabilitated after irrigation. The result: last year we harvested 15.6 percent.

What we want to happen: First, we do not need to import anything, just to fill in the pocket of those who are willing to take on-the-way approach to agriculture. Second: we do not want to rely on import; to be supplied by John dela Cruz, here to harvest, here to harvest, here to purchase. [Applause]

Let's also go back to the situation of our soldiers and police. Thirteen thousand is the usual salary of a PO1 in Metro Manila. Four thousand pesos here goes to rent the house. It seems right that one-third of their wages will go straight to the rent. One-third more, for food. And the remaining one-third, for electricity, water, fare, child education, medicine in case of illness, and so on. It's a good thing if he earns his income at a cost. When it is terminated, it is likely that they will approach 5-6. And when the interest on their debt stays together, will they be able to resist the temptation?

So our promised housing solution in February, this July is already being implemented. We have already reached 4,000 Certificate of Entitlement to Lot Allocation to our friendly soldiers and police. This is part of our target of 21,800 homes by the end of this year. The former four thousand paid for rent every month, now, two hundred pesos, for the home they own. [Applause] The previously deductible payment of monthly rent, can be spent on other expenses.

There are still more than 1,000 houses left, so our police and soldiers have not yet submitted their papers, last call for this batch. But do not worry, next year, our housing will increase, and not just policemen and troops in Luzon will benefit. The NHA [National Housing Authority] has been preparing the Visayas and Mindanao land plots, for next year, we will build apples there. With our staff of the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology and the Bureau of Fire Protection, I still have good news for you: you are here. [Applause]

If we are just security, 'does not it also apply our national dignity? Previously, we could not even get out when we were going to scare us inside our yard. We are now clearly indicative of the world: The Philippines is in the Philippines; [applause] when you get to Recto Bank, for you to land on Recto Avenue. [Applause]

Is this the story of a stand-off in the past? Our seafarers can catch a cannon. What they did during the night, broke p black coconut, painted it black, then pointed to the enemy. [Laughter] It's over. Capability upgrades and modernization of our Armed Forces equipment are coming soon. Our first Hamilton Class Cutter is literally traveling to the ocean, [applause] a more modern ship that we can use to safeguard our shores. We can still get ships like this. It will be added to our own helicopters (plural), patrol craft, and weapons that the AFP [Armed Forces of the Philippines], PNP [Philippine National Police] will buy, including the DOJ [Department of Justice] of great discounts. All this, it can be achieved by sound governance; can be bought at the right price, without having to be sold by anyone.

We have no intention of fighting, but the world needs to know that we are ready to defend ourselves. [Applause] We are also studying the lifting of the case in the West Philippine Sea [applause] at the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, to assure that the next time it is prudent and temperamental to rule every time there is a conflict territories.

I know that the health benefits we show to the people who are focused on our security. Make sure: In the first six months of 2010, up to 1,010 cars and motorcycles were stolen. Let's compare that to 460 cars and motorcycles stolen from January to June this year. The size of the cut, is not it? I'm sorry to say that one or two carnapping cases have been headlined, and not the reduction of its incidents or the higher percentage of stolen cars being returned to their owners.

Another example of a change we enjoy: In May 2003 when the Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act was signed, but since the state did not implement its implementation, only 29 individuals were convicted for seven years. We have already passed that, since 31 human traffickers have been convicted in our administration. This is perhaps the so-called "sea change" of America's Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. As a result, we have been removed from the Tier 2 Watchlist of their Trafficking in Persons Report [Applause]. If we were not removed from this watchlist, we would be grateful for grants that we can get from the Millenium Challenge Corporation and others.

Let's get to work. Work on our first vow to Filipino. The 8 percent unemployment rate in April last year, down to 7.2 percent in April of 2011. [Applause] Let's remember: moving targets are among our unemployed range, because every year there are new graduates seeking work. This last year, they have added thousands of other boys, banders, and other Filipinos to take temporary elections from the elections. Our result is: 1.4 million jobs created last year, ending April.

Previously, the ambition of the Filipinos was touched by the migration. Now, he has a choice of job, and as long as he diligently attends his dreams and determination, he will surely reach it.

It is a great addition to the work created in our country. According to our Philjobnet website, there are 50,000 unemployed jobs, overtime, every month because companies need the skills and knowledge of job seekers. We do not allow this opportunity to be happy; The Department of Labor and Employment, CHED [Commission on Higher Education], TESDA [Technical Education and Skills Development Authority], and DepEd are working to address the issue of job mismatch. The curriculum will be reviewed for employment-seeking industries, and will guide students in selecting job vacancies.

But are we going to take the numbers calling for the growth of a few, if there are still many leftovers? The first step: we refer to the real need; We invest in our most valuable resources: the people. With 2 million families registered in our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, 1.6 million have received their benefits. In the light of Secretary Dinky Soliman, it is estimated that there are more than 100,000 families [applause] - I repeat: more than 100,000 families are suffering from poverty every month. That is why I am confident I will complete the 1.3 million additional family, from the total 2.3 million CCT beneficiary target before this year's end. And with its compliance rate of at least 92 percent, the mothers regularly check the health centers, g infants who are vaccinated, and children who are not allowed outside of school. [Applause]

Since then, and with this peaceful result, I look forward to the support of every Filipino, especially the legislature, in the suggestion of a further copy of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program. We hope that before 2012, 3 million families will be invested for their future.

We give these poor families a chance to get out of life, because their development is also a whole nation. Who owns the products and services of entrepreneurs, if so, is a buyer a beak? When a dentist approaches a knife to feed his family, and he steal or hold, who can be a victim of crime but also us? If our countrymen do not have good food or a home, poor health and serious illness, are not we also at risk for their illness?

We are giving the change to strengthen the foundation of the open air for everyone. For example, health: is not it a remarkable increase in the number of beneficiaries of PhilHealth when applying? Now, through the National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-PR), we assure that 5.2 million Filipino families benefiting PhilHealth are those who really need it. Everyone's development and prosperity: That's our vow. There is nothing left in the straight path. [Applause]

We go to ARMM [Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao]. The former system: The crooked candidates are just plain bitter. When national elections, ARMM sits free to work on the machinery in its region to ensure that the vote, or zero, is the vote of the united. When the ARMM elections are over and Mayor or Governor's debt is due, the administration will operate machinery to win their candidates.

As reported by the COA [Commission on Audit], in the ARMM regional governor office, from January 2008 to September 2009, I will repeat: 80 percent of the disbursements came in cash advance without any proper explanation. If the funds were not lost, a young boy could now cross the ghost bridge, to go to ghost school, where he will teach a ghost teacher. [Applause] Pity child: unremitting difficulty, and no hope of endurance.

We want ARMM to experience the benefits of proper management. So here's our solution: synchronization. Consequently, they need to focus on their campaigns; the fight will be more fair, and will reduce the command votes. Thank you to Congress and passed the law to coincide with the ARMM elections in the national election. [Applause]

Someone asks, why is postponement necessary? To be willing, of course, to get back to the spot, some are ready to repeat the usual way to win. Just imagine if we agreed on the likes of the contra, and we continued the election. They do not have to do anything for two years but prepare for the next election and squeeze their nonsense for a longer period of time. While the brain remained in an official position, the people were left ablaze with the hopelessness of the people.

I have no doubt the consequences of the reforms we have laid out. We are not just talking about it; we have concrete results in our positions. When we say that the road is straight, this road is on the road in Barangay Bagumbayan in Sta. Maria, Laguna. 'When we say clean governance, there are flow of clean water in remote areas such as in Barangay Poblacion, in Ferrol, Romblon. When we say the light of change, we will see a bright light in the communities that used to bump into the gas burner, as we did in Barangay San Marcos, Bunawan, Agusan del Sur. This is happening in many other places; we are also pushing for this happen throughout the Philippines.

Various government agencies are focused on it; they work together and collaborate to reach and accelerate solutions to the problems that the people have long been obstructed.

Do not we have a problem with the flood, which we know from the unremitting and illegal cutting of trees? The former solution: photo-op of planting that the only beneficiary is politicians. The trees were flooded, but they were not sure that they would be standing.

One of the solutions that we are preparing and analyzing is to make the tree look good for communities. They will be given coffee and cacao seeds to plant and grow a livelihood. While waiting for the harvest, they get a stipend to guard the trees planted against the flood. The program can be the beneficiaries of informal settlers, now in the city. We invest in the people, while also investing in nature.

At least one year ago, did we think we could do it? So far, we have fulfilled our promises. Tomorrow, the fact is that all we have dreamed. [Applause]

There are many more creative concepts that come to us, and we have already implemented them. There is a mosquito trap that kills mosquito breeding, which may in fact involve nearly 14 percent decrease in dengue incidence; there is a coconut fiber to be thrown away, but it can be a cheap solution to easy-to-reach roads; there is a landslide sensor that warns if the risk of landslides is flooded; there are signs to indicate that the waters will soon flood the rivers. It's all, Filipino works.

DOST [Department of Science and Technology] and UP [University of the Philippines] are studying the existence of a monorail system, [applause] to address the problem of mass transportation. In the creative mind of fellow Filipinos, we hope to build a light rail system with no more than 100 million pesos to spend per kilometer. With savings, longer railways will be laid out and located in areas far from the commercial center. Those who are dating in the city to find a job, can live somewhat farther, without traveling.

I will repeat: this proposal comes from our fellow Filipinos, for the Philippines. Do you remember the time when our dreams can not reach such projects? Now, I'm telling you: we dream it, we can do it, we will do it. Are we not happy, Filipinos living in these times? [Applause]

In spite of all this, let's not forget about it: it's just a waste of everything we encounter if the culture of corruption that we have not been able to override.

To my fellow employees, from the top to every corner of the bureaucracy: Is not it so honorable to work in government? Is not it right now, rather than being ashamed, would you like to wear your ID sometimes if you board a bus or jeep in your agency? Will we cherish the honor of the people's gift to us?

That is my call to our local government units (LGUs). I am among those who agree that you are the most aware of the needs of the people in your cities and municipalities. Our LGUs can rely on greater independence and capacity, if we hope to use them in a straight line, and take into account the welfare of the entire people.

For example, some municipalities are thought to have to charge electric transmission lines through their areas. They will enter into their local trunk, but it will also increase the cost of the larger number of Filipinos on electricity. I trust that we can balance the interests of your subjects in the interest of the people.

You need to keep our programs in good standing, as the country's development will also bring results to your neighborhoods. Let's finish the agenda focused on the next election only, and our island-mindedness can separate our own country's development progress.

We are also supposed to work together for development. I am grateful to Congress for passing laws on GOCC Governance, ARMM Synchronization, Lifeline Electricity Rates Extension, Joint Congressional Power Commission Extension, Children and Infants' Mandatory Immunization, and Women Night Workers, and many more. .

In a year ago, Congress passed the budget before the end of the year. As a result, the projects were quickly started and the rainy season was over. Tomorrow tomorrow, we will then budget the budget for the next year. [Applause] I hope you'll be able to show off again, so we'll be able to make the most of the fruits of our transformation.

We have a good start. But it is important that we remember: it is only from the beginning. We have more to do. Let me put in Congress some of the laws that will intensify the fulfillment of our people's vows.

We are entitled to compensate victims of the Martial Law; [applause] provides fair wages and benefits for the householders; and the implementation of a better pension system for our soldiers. Sinu we also support the expansion of the scholarship scope provided by DOST to talented, skilled pupils; promoting enhanced general health; and the protection of our environment and the facilities that will ensure the safety of the people at the time of the disaster.

It also includes the Bureau of Corrections (BuCor), the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), the National Electrification Administration (NEA), and PTV 4, knowledge and time, they can better fulfill their public service.

I did not put everyone who wanted to join their advocacy here on the SONA. But the budget and budget message details are complete. For those interested, just read the details there.

Some say that I have personally solved the claims of anomalies. It's true: I'm actually doing my job right, [applause] and making the mistake of doing wrong. And I should not just be personally involved in this issue. It should be personal to all of us, because every Filipino is a victim of it. [Applause]

It has been a long time-remains inaccurate. Can not just "Oks"; it can not be "nothing." When we forget them, the past mistakes will happen again. If the offenders do not pay, we would like to invite those who intend to do something wrong if you can, you will repeat what you did. [Applause]

In fact, we have a lot of other things-but no longer do it, I just give you an example. In PAGCOR [Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation]: coffee. The former boss of the agency for coffee spent billions of pesos; at just 100 pesos per cup, they will be consuming 10 million cups of coffee. [Laughter] Perhaps now that the leadership of PAGCOR is still in the eyes of those who drink this coffee. [Laughter] Look at them, and ask: are you sleeping? [Laughter]

Entering the new Ombudsman former Supreme Court Justice Conchita Carpio-Morales, we will have a security guards who will not be paid by government officials. I hope that this year, the case will have to deal with many corruption issues, and cause the situation to be overturned. The time has come to an end when the government comes up with a cold case. When we are filing, the evidence is strong, the testimonies are clear, and surely there is no way to go wrong. [Applause]

Let us realize that obtaining ultimate justice does not end with prosecution if not the detention of the guilty. I am confident that the Department of Justice is implementing a big part in enforcing criminal acts, especially in cases of tax evasion, drug trafficking, human trafficking, smuggling, graft and corruption, and extrajudicial killings. [Applause]

There is no torture: honest and good governance gives birth to good results. Think of it: we have implemented government service offerings, and have provided more funds for projects without having to raise taxes.

That's really the plan: make sure the fight is fair; stop the apocalypse of the mighty; and make sure that the former system which benefits a few will be a source of opportunity for everyone.

We are focusing our attention on the road: the road, the government, the vast majority of society. It will bring confidence to bring business; it will also ensure that the people's fund will go to its proper location: Infrastructure that will ensure the overall economic and employment prospects, and social services that will ensure that no one can be left behind. There are many more business-to-business opportunities through tourism; the Filipino will not be hungry for boosting agriculture. Those who have previously been neglected, will invest in the future.

It produces a cycle where there is certainly a full range of workplaces, and there are consumers increasingly growing businesses.

I know that until now there are still few complaining in our management style. You have seen our style, and its affiliated results. You see their style, and where we have it. To those who are open eyes, it is clear where the right one is.

Now that we are the government, the direction of our country is clear. A country where the opportunity is at hand; where the need is safeguarded; where every sweep drops, every moment of patience, and every grain of suffering that goes through us. If you do something good, it will come back to you well. And if you do something bad, you're sure to be responsible. [Applause]

I remember a lady who came to me during the campaign; he warned, "Hey, you're cautious, you've got a lot of trouble."

He said yes: I also have a doubt at times. But I'm not sure I'm going to take a straight path: I'm really good at knowing that I'm behind you. Thank you. [Applause]

Thank you to the priests and bishops who are intensely engaged in dialogue with us, such as Cardinal Rosales and Vidal. We do not have that close to Cardinal Rosales, but I believe he poured out everything to reduce the misunderstanding of government and church. By the appointment of Archbishop Palma, human rights advocate and nature, my deeply convincing relationship, and unequivocally, will be created between the state and the church. [Applause]

Thank you to our Cabinet, with no recognized period of sleep or rest, just carry out the national agenda. Special mention is PAGASA [Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical Services Administration], which now provides reliable warning. [Applause]

And as we walk through the path of honesty and integrity in governance, here's what I can say: You choose the path where the people are oppressed. We have chosen the path to defend the people. [Applause] We're right; you're wrong. When you return to the oppression of the people, you will not succeed. [Applause]

To all of us who are on the straight path: you have created the opportunity to change the way you are, and to make it better for the next generation of Filipinos. You are still chasing drivers; you teachers and students just coming home from the class; you are continuing to create the fiery furnishings of the fire of our Filipinos; you policemen, soldiers, camerards, and firefighters; you are honored to work in the Philippines, in the middle of the sea, or in other countries; you are loyal to us in government, any province or party; you Filipinos who are listening to me today-you have created this opportunity.

You have created a real government working for you. We have five more years to make sure we will not be back in the past. We will not shatter this very good result of what we started.

When we see a hole in the system, let's not try to get through. Do not let us go through the effort to work hard. That's right, it's right to go ahead, it's okay, because we're all going to our future.

Let's put an end to the culture of negativism; Let's lift the fellow-Filipinos at every opportunity. Why are others, the tendency to find any nasty things in our country? And very hard-like a sin-to say good? Do we still remember the last time we commended the fellow Filipinos?

Let's stop the meal down. The former industry of criticism that we can not neglect, let's just let it go. Let's do our brain-crabs; can we do what we do well?

If you look good, do not hesitate to praise it. When you see the police at the corner, striping without a raincoat under the rain, let's approach you and say, "Thank you."

If you get sick and you see the nurse who is taking care of you, instead of serving foreigners for a larger salary, please, "Thank you." [Applause]

Before you go home from school, approach the teacher you choose to invest in your future rather than prioritizing your own comfort; say, "Thank you": Like my teacher on the screen today, Thank you Miss Escasa. [Applause]

If you meet your representative on the road that is either unlit (or not), and now you can walk clear enough, approach him and say: "Thank you."

So, in the Filipino people, my boss has been with us for this day: many, many thanks to the changes we now enjoy.

The Philippines and the Philippines are alive.