"","x"
"1","“A Nation of Achievers”"
"2","Two years ago, I came before you for the first time to report on the state of the nation, and I gave you a faithful picture of a nation bogged in crisis and a people gripped by fear of the future. Barely a year ago, I came again before you to report that the crisis had been surmounted and that the people had a new lease on hope and faith. Today, as I pass the halfway mark of my term of office, I am glad to report that in the year just past we have sustained the momentum of our advance; we have moved forward at an accelerated and accelerating rate."
"3","Many grave problems remain and most of our people’s needs remain acute. But today, we face them with the confidence of self-made success; we have lost our fear of the future; problems have become challenges and goals to action."
"4","In terms of history, two years is just a fleeting instant in the life of a nation. What could be done in two years, set against the centuries-old hard crust of problems—the mass poverty, ignorance, and disease that make up the main heritage of a former subject people?"
"5","But we believed in our people. We believed that in two years a resolute people could do something meaningful for themselves—perhaps meaningful enough to alter their destiny. We set out two years ago to accomplish some basic tasks which popular belief held to be impossible. The results of our common labors hearten us. For they show that the impossible can be attained and that in some respects, it has in fact been attained."
"6","Some of these achievements are in fact historic breakthroughs for our people in their march to a fuller life. Others are much less spectacular, but in the long run just as important. Consider the following:"
"7","Paid-in capital of newly registered corporations for the period January t0 November 1967 totaled P385 million compared to P358 million in 1966 and P294 million in 1965. Increased capitalization of existing corporations amounted to P1,108 million in 1967 compared to P824 million in 1966."
"8","There is a new birth of confidence in ourselves as Filipinos. This is in itself a source of great creative power. It reminds us of our distinguished heritage as the nation that pioneered the libertarian movement in Asia and founded the first democratic republic in our part of the world."
"9","The experience of nations shows that the cost of development must be borne mainly by the people themselves. Increasingly, the burden of development will have to be shared by citizens in proportion to their economic means. It is in this spirit that the administration plans to propose to the Congress this year sweeping reforms in our traditional and inadequate tax structure. To act on this will require an atmosphere of courage and civic spirit and the ability to face the unpleasant today in return for the just rewards of tomorrow."
"10","It seems to me that this will put to a test the capacity for courage and statesmanship of the distinguished Members of Congress."
"11","We appeal to you for your support so that the means required to sustain the pace of our efforts for national development can be made available to the government."
"12","I think we can now point to a well-defined consensus as to certain priorities that will demand our undivided attention and concern in the year just beginning."
"13","A national consensus certainly stands behind the fuller implementation of the land reform, especially in Central Luzon."
"14","A massive housing program for low-income groups will be launched under a coordinated leadership with various agencies of the government taking part. An energetic thrust in the field of manpower training will be carried out to upgrade our labor skills and meet the growing needs of business and industry for technicians and skilled hands. We shall engage in a vigorous campaign for the promotion of Philippine export products to realize an increased amount of foreign exchange needed to provide the import requirements of our growing economy."
"15","We shall concentrate great energies on the problem of peace and order. Local governments will be asked to play a more active role."
"16","We shall press vigorously the existing efforts to assure our food self-sufficiency on a sustained basis, to meet the crisis posed by the lack of schoolhouses for our children, to conserve our natural resources, and to upgrade our human resources through adequate educational facilities."
"17","The administration addressed itself upon taking office to the three most serious requirements:"
"18","These problems had to be solved to attain the basic objective of the economic program, which was to increase real income per head by about 2.5% annually. This meant that gross national product had to increase at the average of 6.1% annually over the four years of the plan: the target growth rates to increase progressively from 5.8% in the first year to 6.3% in the fourth year."
"19","In the attainment of these targets, large amounts of both investible resources and foreign exchange were expected to be needed; and foreign exchange was thought harder to obtain. Domestic savings were expected to fall short of investment requirements by a total of P2.4 billion over the four years of the program; but the shortage of foreign exchange earnings as compared to import requirements was projected at P3.3 billion. A high priority was therefore attached to the expansion and diversification of our exports."
"20","The target growth rate for agriculture was 4.0% for the four years of the plan. Over the last two years, our agricultural production index has been growing at almost 6% annually. The increase in real agricultural value added was 5.1% during the last year. Target growth rates were also exceeded in the transportation and commerce sectors and just about matched in the service sector. The manufacturing sector has responded vigorously to massive government support. I shall dwell later on the extent of this response."
"21","Especially encouraging was the extremely high growth rate in agriculture over these two years, almost one and a half against the target rate that had seemed ambitious by the standards of the past. It is an indication that, well ahead of schedule, we have made a major breakthrough in food production. The National Economic Council has certified that we will have a substantial oversupply of rice at the end of the current crop year."
"22","Recognizing the importance of industrial development to our country’s economic growth, we immediately instituted measures to relieve the manufacturing sector."
"23","Thus, we harnessed all government agencies to an unrelenting drive against smuggling. Tariffs on imports were strictly administered to protect local products; antidumping measures were intensified. On the positive side, our domestic industries were encouraged to step up operations, to expand and to diversify according to the demands of the local and foreign markets. Infrastructure projects were implemented to aid industrial undertakings. Capital investments were stimulated in both domestic and foreign sectors through the issuance of an Administrative Order to guide investments, the approval of an amendment to the Corporation Law to allow broader investments in mining ventures, and the enactment of an Investment Incentives Act designed to induce the rapid growth of industries."
"24","The most tangible results of government assistance to industry in the past year were in financing. To alleviate the crisis of manufacturing and mining enterprises, the Development Bank of the Philippines accelerated the industrial refinancing program which the administration launched in its first year. By November 1967, a total of P1,073 million had been channeled to distressed industrial enterprises under the program."
"25","In addition, the administration geared the lending operations of DBF, GSIS, SSS, and PNB to the need to bolster the pace of industrialization. By the end of September last year, these financial institutions had extended accommodations totaling four-and-a-half billion pesos. Nearly 40% of this figure, more than P1.7 billion, was coursed to mining and manufacturing enterprises."
"26","The beneficial effects of this financial assistance and of these measures instituted to curb smuggling and protect the local products can be readily seen in the upsurge of activity in our industrial sector. Production for the second quarter of last year, the latest available figure, exceeded the comparable 1966 level by 8.7%. Formerly distressed industries have come up with definite signs of good health, particularly the textile industry which was floundering and hence required sizable aid from the government. Other essential industries also showed significant improvement. The output of plywood rose by 14% in 1967; veneer by 38%; cement by 28%; and tire manufacturing by 20%."
"27","In general, mining and manufacturing in 1967 made very favorable improvements over 1966, and even more from earlier years. Similarly, and significantly, electric power consumption rose by about 15% from the level in 1966."
"28","The gratifying trends in the operations of our existing industries have carried over to the business atmosphere. Our private sector—our entrepreneurs, investors, and industrialists—have shown a new faith in the future of Philippine industry. Some 2,112 new corporations were registered in 1967, an increase over the figure for 1966 and exceeding the registrations in 1965 by over 40%. The subscribed capital stock of these corporations combined reached over P400 million, representing a tremendous amount of fresh capital pumped into Philippine industry. Out of these registrations, some 483 new companies with over P150 million in subscribed capital were in mining and manufacturing."
"29","As to the actual implementation of industrial projects, we identified more than 40 major ventures in mining and manufacturing which started operations during the past two years of this administration. The essential products which these projects are now adding to our industrial strength include great volumes of refractory chromite, magnetite, tiles, cement, plywood and veneer, resins, ammonium sulfate and liquid ammonia, carbon black, synthetic fabrics, and petroleum products. A host of other large-sized plants are currently in the process of construction or expansion. Some will supplement existing production capacities, while others will introduce new product lines for the domestic market and for our export trade. The new capacities will include among others, steel products, copper ore and copper concentrates, pulp and paper, and plasticizers."
"30","We have also reached the final stages of negotiations for the exploitation of our valuable nickel deposits in Mindanao, which offer the prospects of a huge new source of foreign exchange income for our economy from the export of nickel or ferronickel, mild steel billets, and cobalt."
"31","Loan agreements with the AID were similarly approved during the year. Irrigation received a $4.7 million loan to finance the acquisition of equipment needed for irrigation construction and rehabilitation work. Also, a $2.0 million loan for undertaking feasibility studies was granted."
"32","Assistance has likewise been granted to our export crops, of which the case of abaca may be cited. The production of abaca dipped by 4.9% from 135.3 thousand metric tons in Crop Year 1966 to 128.7 thousand metric tons in Crop Year 1967. To alleviate the plight of this industry, the government extended financial help by releasing P2.5 million to the Abaca Corporation of the Philippines."
"33","Prices of abaca were also threatened when the U.S. announced its decision to dispose of its abaca stockpile. The Philippine government intervened in behalf of this industry and secured an agreement for a more orderly schedule of disposal."
"34","In highways, 515 kilometers were paved with concrete and 903 kilometers with asphalt; 3,167 kilometers of feeder roads were constructed and 7,685 lineal meters of temporary badges were replaced by permanent steel and reinforced concrete structures. The complete projects include roads and bridges thousands travel every day: the Manila North and South Diversion Roads, E. de los Santos Avenue, the Sayre Highway in Mindanao, the Cagayan Valley Road, and the Nagtahan and Guadalupe bridges."
"35","In irrigation, a total of 22 national gravity, 109 communal, and 813 pump projects were undertaken, designed to irrigate a total of 161,670 hectares of farmlands, out of which 75,092 hectares were placed under irrigation during the two-year period. Rehabilitation of the 79 existing systems provided extended water coverage to an additional 25,500 hectares."
"36","In airports and airways, runways, taxiways, and aprons in 25 airports were either constructed or improved and a terminal building for the MactanAirport was constructed. In our effort to provide the improved communications facilities which are essential to safe air travel, we are attempting to provide an integrated nationwide airways system under a turnkey deferred payment arrangement."
"37","In ports and harbors, 55 new berths, nine of which are for international shipping, were completed, with attendant port service facilities. The principal port projects were the completion of Piers 3 and 15 at the ManilaSouthHarbor. The first phase of marginal wharf for the proposed ManilaInternationalPort is nearing completion, while the contract portion of Pier 16 at the NorthHarbor is already complete. Other major port projects included those at the ports of Tacloban, Zamboanga, Iligan, Dumaguete, Pagadian, Batangas, Pulupandan, and Makan."
"38","On August 1, 1966, by presidential directive, half of the Bureau of Public Works fleet of 14 dredges were transferred to the operational control of the Philippine Navy. Before the transfer, the fleet had been dredging at the rate of 317,000 cubic meters a month. This total was immediately improved to 616,000 cubic meters a month; by December, the fleet was dredging 1,500,000 cubic meters a month, almost a fivefold improvement. At the same time, the cost of dredging was cut to one-sixth of what it had previously been, from P5.00 a cubic meter to P0.70 a cubic meter."
"39","In power, 112,000 additional kilowatt capacity of electrical energy was added and work is continuing on projects to provide 225,000 kilowatts of new hydro and thermal power. Two major hydroelectric power projects were undertaken. One of these, the Angat Project, was inaugurated last September 9; the other, Maria Cristina Unit 3 in Lanao, is almost complete. The Bataan Thermal Plant Unit I was started last August."
"40","A total of 97 provincial waterworks projects were completed, of which 37 were improvements or extensions of existing systems; 365 artesian wells were drilled and 1,422 more rehabilitated; 35 springs were developed for water supply. The Manila and Suburbs Water Supply Project continues to receive special attention, and is expected to be completed by December 1968."
"41","Twenty projects in major or regional flood control systems and 60 localized flood control projects were completed. The principal projects were projects to control rivers in Pampanga, Agno, Cotabato, Ilog-Hilabangan, Agusan, Bicol, and Manila."
"42","In schoolbuildings, over 5,816 units of prefabricated two- and three-room steel and wooden types have been delivered to sites, of which 1,765 units of the steel type and 1,247 units of the wooden type were erected and another 1,145 units of the steel type were under construction. In addition, 1,179 schoolrooms of other various types were erected, with 135 rooms more under way. These have the capacity to house 660,000 schoolchildren over our many rural and urban areas, assuming single-session classes of 40 pupils per class."
"43","Finally, in the related field of transportation, the government was instrumental in securing significant addition to our shipping capacity, both interisland and international. With the use of German capital aid and under loans and guarantees provided by the Development Bank of the Philippines, four passenger-cargo liners and two bulk carriers were ordered by five interisland shipping companies. Also, during the year and likewise under DBF guarantee, two oil tankers with a total deadweight tonnage of 173,000 were ordered for our international shipping fleet; they have increased our capacity for overseas cargo carriage by fully one-third."
"44","We have also undertaken vigorous measures to conserve our forest areas through the strict enforcement of the law against illegal cutting and through a sustained reforestation program which saw the planting last year of 139,273 hectares with 292 million tress using mainly such fast growing varieties as the Kaatoan Bangkal and the Albizzia falcata. We have required logging concessionaires to conduct systematic tree-planting, which they religiously do now since failure to comply could mean cancellation of their permits."
"45","In this way, we have speeded up the systematic replenishment of our denuded forests and reduced the dangers which the wanton destruction of our forests areas in the past brought in its wake."
"46","By improving our administrative machinery for collections of customs revenues, we have been able to increase net customs revenues accruing to the General Funds by 44.3% from 1965 to 1967. On the other hand, imports increased by 30% only during the same period."
"47","The improvement in the administrative machinery has also helped diminish smuggling. The textile industry increased its production of cotton fabrics and knitted fabrics by 30% and 43%, respectively, in 1967. On the other hand, specific tax revenues on cigarettes increased by 11.9% per cent in the calendar year just ended. These outstanding increases, in the industries most sensitive to smuggling, indicate the extent to which this social and economic evil has been brought under control."
"48","Some new administrative projects and practices may be mentioned. The Decentralization Act of 1967 has been approved granting further autonomous powers to local governments. The allotment share of provinces and cities has been increased from 10 to 13% and the allotment share of municipalities, from 2 to 4%. To enable provincial and city governments to undertake field agricultural extension work and rural health work, they have been empowered to retain the amounts theretofore contributed by provincial, city, and municipal governments to the national government for these purposes. Steps are now being undertaken for the establishment and operation of a security printing plant to safeguard the printing, issuance, distribution, and procurability of security printing jobs. Steps are also being taken for the early operation of the Board of Investments, which has been created to encourage domestic and foreign investments in certain areas of economic activity to accelerate the sound development of our economy."
"49","Our participation in Southeast Asian educational cooperation has attained for our country the establishment of two internationally assisted centers for regional research and graduate study in agriculture and tropical medicine."
"50","In land reform areas, credit assistance to farmers rose by 250% over the previous year, with a total of P3,549,169 in loans released to 3,029 farmers working in an area of 13,762 hectares."
"51","Also significant was the acquisition by the government of one private agricultural estate, thus finally inaugurating the land-buying activity of the Land Bank. With an area of 108,8433 hectares, the properly was purchased at a cost of P380,900, of which 10% was paid in cash and 90% in Land Bank bonds."
"52","All these demonstrates the validity of our decision to proclaim the whole 2nd District of Pampanga a land reform area, a bold decision which, for the first time, raised the implementation of land reform to a serious level. Our experience in the 2nd District of Pampanga has proved, beyond doubt, that land reform is both necessary and feasible and that our people, both landowners and landless, area now prepared for land reform’s liberating and modernizing impact."
"53","In Central Luzon, the ACA extended loans amounting to P1,636,456.05 to 3,572 farmers, thus raising total ACA fund releases in the area to P25,894,933.39 for 49,059 farmers; at the same time, a total of 153,327 bags of fertilizers valued at P2,685,713.40 were issued to farmers, including 55,700 bags secured under the reparations program."
"54","This will consist of large-scale land development program for the settlement of landless rural people on economically viable farms in land schemes provided with all essential public utilities and social amenities, adequate management, training and extension facilities, and suitable processing and marketing arrangement in order to raise very substantially their level of living. The aim is to develop them into progressive and knowledgeable farmers so that they can take their rightful place in the community."
"55","I have also directed the Land Authority to coordinate with the Land Bank in arranging with landowners the exchange of their present landholdings with government lands for conversion into agro-industrial estates. This will implement the land reform objective of converting landowners into entrepreneurs, of shifting capital and energy from idle lands to productive industry."
"56","Hospital services were increased and upgraded, as 17 government and private hospitals were opened and 76 hospital plans and designs were approved for immediate construction. Supplies and medicines worth P1.5 million were channeled to government hospitals for the benefit of our less fortunate countrymen."
"57","Last year, a cancer center was established with the cooperation of the private sector, the first of many cancer centers to be established in various parts of the country."
"58","To cope with the needs of a developing industrial sector, a Manpower Development Council, composed of agencies whose activities have to do with human resources development directly or indirectly, has emerged to undertake the planning and implementation of an integrated manpower development program."
"59","An improved industrial relations climate was brought about significantly through the intensification of preventive mediation by the Department of Labor. This included the holding of industry-wide dialogues between labor and management in the shipping and arrastre, wood, and coconut industries."
"60","We shall always keep an open mind to further salary readjustments as changing conditions require and as we succeed, through economy, in making funds available."
"61","The SSS also channeled last year a total of P10 million to the government rice self-sufficiency program in order to help increase rural credit capacity and enable the farmers to avail of new and improved techniques of rice production."
"62","In this connection, field surveys have been undertaken, covering 17 provinces for selected food crops, 13 provinces for livestock movements, 10 provinces for commercial poultry farms, and 8 principal Greater Manila markets for the marketing system. At the same time, topographical survey of an appropriate site in the FortBonifacio reservation is in process."
"63","The market, when completed, will provide fanners and producers from 20 provinces with a convenient outlet for their produce, create adequate storage facilities, and reduce distribution costs. Retail markets and stores and large-scale consumers in the Greater Manila Area will have, on the other hand, adequate and regular supply of foodstuff, thereby reducing and stabilizing prices."
"64","We have instituted vigorous measures to combat this threat. The PC strength has been augmented to intensify the campaign against criminality and against dissidents. This intensification is reflected in the increasing number of combat operations. The fact remains, however, that our police strength per 10,000 population, national as well as local, is one of the lowest in the world."
"65","Hand in hand with increasing the strength of our national police, the PC has been revitalized and revamped for more efficient prosecution of the peace and order campaign. The METROCOM was recently activated and is now effectively assisting the Manila Police Department in maintaining peace and order in Manila. In view of its success, METROCOM-type units are now being organized in other urban centers of the Philippines. Recently, I mobilized the entire Armed Forces to augment the still limited resources for the peace and order campaign."
"66","To harness civilian participation and cooperation in the anticrime drive, peace and order councils have been organized on the national and local levels."
"67","Despite all these measures, the incidence of crime index (major crimes per 100,000 population) continues to show an upward trend. Peace and order, therefore, remains a serious problem which will require our increasing attention in the years to come. One reason for this is the uncertain and diffused location of responsibility for maintaining peace and order on the local level. At the proper time, I will propose the placing of local police forces directly under the Police Commission, and thereby liberate police forces from politics. Their immediate improvement is one of our major aims this year."
"68","The stand taken by the administration on various legal controversies has been sustained by our courts of justice thus underscoring this administration."
"69","In line for updating and revision are the Revised Penal Code, the Code of Commerce, the Revised Administrative Code, the Internal Revenue Code, and the Customs and Tariff Code. On the other hand, there is now a demand to codify our labor and social legislation, and the laws on natural resources."
"70","In support of new projects in the field of industrial research, more than P6 million yearly have been allotted by the government for the Philippine Textile Institute, the MetalsIndustryDevelopmentCenter, and Coconut Research."
"71","The government has also been active in tapping foreign assistance for the support of research in applied science. In the field of mineral resources development, the government has undertaken jointly with international agencies special projects in coal development and applied geology. More than P8 million yearly in counterpart funds are being expended by the government for foreign assisted research in dairy, fish, soil and training in agriculture, forestry, and meteorology."
"72","The government is also supporting, through bilateral foreign assistance agreements, an Institute of Small Scale Industries and a Technological and ResearchCenter for Cottage Industries. The administration is drafting a plan providing for increased financial support for science and technological development, including the possibility of establishing regional science high schools in the Visayas and Mindanao."
"73","At the same time, we shall soon put into effect a scheme for the benefit of students, building on an existing service of the Social Security System whereby students may be provided loans, under special terms and conditions, to cover their school expenses. This will be financed from a special fund contributed by various financial institutions of the government."
"74","For the task providing our society with sufficient guarantees of stability and security, in the form of more abundant goods and a greater sense of well-being, I have enlisted the services of the Armed Forces. Although it is proper that our soldiers must be prepared to perform their role in the military defense of the country, it is necessary that today they must also participate in the more immediate and vital defense of the nation against poverty, ignorance, disease, and injustice."
"75","We have harnessed and augmented the manpower and equipment resources of military establishment in our heightened drive for economic development and for internal security."
"76","In pursuance of this, we have activated 15 engineer construction battalions, increased the intake and expanded the concept of training of 20-year-olds, intensified the AFP’s civic action role, broadened its peace and order operations, and increased its capability not only to provide for national security but also for participation in national development implementation. The AFP has achieved outstanding success in this."
"77","We also sent the PHILCAG to South Vietnam to participate not in combat operation but in purely civic action operations, assisting that distressed country in the long range but equally important task of social and economic rehabilitation."
"78","Despite the continuing insurgency threat and the increasing number of civic action mission assigned to the Armed Forces, its proportional share of our total national budget has actually declined over the past 13 years. Budgetary data show that this has gradually decreased from 17.5% in FY 1965 to 14.6% on FY 1967."
"79","In this regard, we will activate five additional engineering battalions and establish 38 new civic action centers so that each province will have one such center. We will create 100 military rural health teams to minister to remote and medically depressed areas where civilian doctors are reluctant to venture for reason of personal security or inadequacy of compensation. We will also establish 13 Coast Guard stations to strengthen our antismuggling posture, and continue to acquire more modern weaponry for our ground, sea, and air units. I wish to point out in this connection that additional equipment for five complete engineering battalions, procured through the U.S. Military Assistance Program, will arrive before the end of this Fiscal Year 1968."
"80","It is also our purpose to exploit fully the capabilities of the AFP for manpower development and training, tying this in with the annual call of 20-year-old trainees. More 20-year-olds will be called and given training not only in the basic military arts but more importantly in agricultural, construction, and other technical skills. They will be drawn from and trained in their respective localities and their nonmilitary training will emphasize those skills that are responsive to the manpower needs of the particular locality."
"81","We are also studying a phasing-out program, over a 10-year period, of the military units and installations located in the Metropolitan Manila area. For national security and economic purposes, these military installations should be moved out of population and industrial centers and transferred to more militarily secure and underdeveloped areas. The valuable real estate presently occupied by the Armed Forces can then be sold to provide the much needed funds for economic development, such as financing the operations of the Land Bank or funding the vital infrastructure projects."
"82","Certainly, we shall continue to maintain the PHILCAG in South Vietnam as an international commitment. Valuable as the PHILCAG’s civic action operations are now in the country, they will be increasingly valuable in helping provide the means for South Vietnam’s economic and social recovery once the fighting is over."
"83","What we have done is to refashion the role of the military towards civic action—the reassignment of soldiers from housekeeping in the barracks to active participation in the epic of development."
"84","Thus, as a consequence of the specific agreements with the leaders of Malaysia, Indonesia, and Thailand to undertake with the Philippines joint economic, cultural, and educational projects, we can look forward to more speedy economic development on a national as well as on a regional scale."
"85","Our Asian identity has been further strengthened by our participation in the Asian Pacific Council. Concrete projects under the ASPAC, such as the Experts Services Register in Canberra, the Social and Cultural Centre in Seoul, and the Food and Fertilizer Bank, all designed to accelerate regional economic and material growth, are now in the final stages of implementation."
"86","I journeyed to Australia, following the tragic death of Prime Minister Holt late last year, to convey the sympathy of the Filipino people to that great country, with which we are allied in SEATO and ASPAC."
"87","My visit to the Republic of Vietnam about the middle of last year enabled me to witness the humanitarian efforts and constructive building projects of our officers and men in the PHILCAG. That visit also gave me the opportunity to assess with the leaders of South Vietnam the chances of restoring peace, a requisite of enduring progress in our part of the world."
"88","The measures that were contained in the June circulars and the subsequent October circulars contained a mixed policy of partial restriction and partial relaxation. The burden of the restrictive measures fell on imports financing because of the disturbing trend of our external trade."
"89","A second purpose of these credit restrictions was to contain the increase in prices; but the ultimate solution to high prices, as our recent experience clearly demonstrates, is to improve production and distribution facilities, especially of food products. The early success of our rice program was reflected in a decline of the Philippine Consumer Price Index in the months of April and May 1967 from its level in December 1966. Then two typhoons occurred which damaged the rice crop and blocked roads leading from production to market centers, and prices promptly rose again. The movement of vegetable prices was an even more striking demonstration. In April of last year, vegetables prices were 27% below their December 1966 level. Then the storms came, and prices rose by more than half of their year-end level."
"90","The government during this period significantly influenced the size and direction of private investment, as well as the conditions under which business was done. Domestic markets were protected against dumping by proceedings against undervalued synthetics and chemicals, and against actual and technical smuggling particularly in textiles and luxury items."
"91","Massive support was also granted to the private sector by government financial institutions. Between January 1966 and November 1967, as has been mentioned, no less than P4.4 billion were extended by the five major government financial institutions to private concerns in the form of loans, guarantees, and equity investment. These institutions were the DBF, PNB, GSIS, SSS, and NIDC. Of this total, P1.7 billion, or 40%, went to manufacturing, and over P786 million to agriculture, forestry, and fishing."
"92","The management of government debt was also undertaken with imagination, efficiency, and success. The market for government securities for the first time in our financial history became truly widened, with treasury bills becoming available to the private commercial sector at competitive interest rates. We have realized as much as P175 million from this source, with the balance now standing at about P130 million. The progress bonds of the Development Bank of the Philippines have been an outstanding success and have tapped private savings to the extent of P200 million as of the beginning of this month."
"93","In short, we have used with imagination and skill the resources we have for increasing the rate and improving the structure of capital formation, and we have added significantly to these resources. But both our recent success and the pressing needs of the people inspire us to further ambition."
"94","Our budgetary policy, therefore, ever since I assumed the Presidency, is to maintain a balanced budget insofar as the ordinary operating expenses of the government are concerned. Funds raised through the issues of bonds and other forms of borrowings have been applied to infrastructure, development expenditures, and investments."
"95","In the allocation of funds, more emphasis has been given to economic development and less on general government. Two years ago, the budget for economic development amounted to only 25.0% of total expenditures. We have increased this to 30.8%."
"96","On the other hand, the budget for general government has been decreasing percentage-wise. It was 14.4% of the total budget in Fiscal Year 1966. During the current fiscal year, it amounts to only 11.5%. Moreover, contrary to the common impression, the budget for national defense has not grown in proportion to the total annual budget. In spite of the increased responsibilities of our Armed Forces, due to its dual military duties and civic action activities, its expenditures even decreased from 14.5% in Fiscal Year 1966 to an estimated 14.2% for the current fiscal period."
"97","Capital expenditures also increased from 9.3% in Fiscal Year 1966 to 17.5% in Fiscal Year 1967, while current operating expenditures decreased from 90.7% to 82.5% for the same fiscal year."
"98","Of the problems that still confront us, the most serious one, and one that is important to national self-respect as well as economic life, is the problem of improving our foreign exchange earnings. With our rapid growing population and in our present stage of industrialization, our country must trade in order to live acceptably well. The limits of easy import substitution have been reached, and substantial overcapacities already exist in many industry lines. At the same time, the country’s list of exports has not changed markedly over the last 20 years, and remains composed primarily of agricultural products and industrial raw materials, for which the world market grows too slowly. Furthermore, our preferential trade relations with the United States are due to expire in a few years."
"99","This is a problem of the greatest importance; it affects every aspect of our economic life; and the pressure to increase export earnings will continue as far ahead as we can foresee."
"100","The export drive must begin immediately, and continue far into the future. Later on, I shall outline the measures I believe necessary to undertake immediately."
"101","These longer-term goals are set forth in the rolling programs of our planning and implementing agencies. We shall merely outline here what has to be done over the next year. Our operational program involves activities in four areas: continuing government reorganization for efficiency; projects to be directly undertaken by the government, especially in infrastructure; manpower development and land reform; the improvement of our foreign trade; and the direction of domestic and foreign investment."
"102","Our basic criterion in the selection of our infrastructure projects has been their contribution to economic growth; but our selection has been realistic as well. We have also considered the financial resources available to the government and what we hope to obtain from new taxes, as well as the capabilities of the agencies to utilize capital funds."
"103","In highways, we propose the concrete and asphalt paving of a total of 1,000 kilometers, the construction of 2,000 kilometers of developmental and feeder roads, and 9,900 lineal meters of permanent bridges."
"104","We have started the groundwork for the construction of the 3,000-kilometer Philippine-Japan Friendship Highway which, running from LaoagCity in the north to ZamboangaCity in the south, will link Luzon, the Visayas, and Mindanao. This highway will serve two purposes: It will also contain emergency airstrips, to augment existing airports, to make possible aircraft landings along the whole stretch of this cross-country highway at regular intervals."
"105","We propose the irrigation of an additional 140,000 hectares to comprise our main irrigation program. In addition, we will continue the construction of communal and pump irrigation projects which will extend irrigation benefits to some 50,000 hectares more. We are pursuing the construction of the multimillion-peso Upper Pampanga River Project which is designed primarily for irrigating 81,000 hectares in and providing domestic water supply to Nueva Ecija."
"106","In airports and airways, we propose the concrete paving of runways and taxiways in 20 airports. We will improve and modernize the air navigation facilities throughout the country urgently needed for the safety of life and property in air travel. We also expect to complete runway resurfacing of the ManilaInternationalAirport by April this year."
"107","Various projects at the Port of Manila will be completed, and provision has also been made for the improvement of 31 other ports throughout the country."
"108","The most conspicuous of the communications projects is the permanent Earth station of the Philippine Satellite Communications Project to be completed in April of this year. An interim Earth station for this project was completed in a record time of 45 days and made operational in April of last year."
"109","Other targets include 14,000 school units, 9 hood control projects costing some P13.6 million, low-cost housing, 40 waterworks projects, and various community projects."
"110","To achieve these targets, we will need P580 million this year. This, however, does not include the whole cost of special projects like the Philippine-Japan Friendship Highway."
"111","In land reform, we shall concentrate our efforts on the second land reform district of Pampanga to make the program more effective. Also, sources of funds were authorized last year for the Land Bank; we shall encourage this year the utilization of these sources to make the operations of the Land Bank more effective. New funds will be drawn by the bank from the issue of bonds up to P10 million, which I authorized last year; and from the proceeds of the sale of 16 government properties in Manila authorized by Republic Act 5169. The sale is expected to realize up to P120 million, of which three-quarters is to go to Land Bank and the remainder to the Agricultural Credit Administration."
"112","To complement our land reform efforts, we are opening up the 33,000-hectare Barira Farm in Parang, Cotabato, for Army veterans, former dissidents, and landless tenants. Later this year, we shall also open 30,000 hectares in Tuao, Lanao del Norte."
"113","Among these measures are an in-plant skills training program responsive to current and projected needs of industry; and training for employment of out-of-school youth and unemployed adults through a network of practical training centers and free vocational instruction at the secondary school level. These proposals shall be embodied in an omnibus manpower development and training bill which I shall shortly submit to Congress for consideration and enactment."
"114","We are laying the groundwork for a national youth development program. Eventually, it will redeem some 3 million of out-of-school youth, teach them civics, physical fitness, occupational and food production techniques. It involves the establishment of a national institute for youth leadership, pilot training centers, and the cooperation of the Manpower Development Council, the National Youth Coordinating Council, the Departments of Education, Labor, National Defense, the PACD, and the private sector."
"115","Finally, in the area of housing, we shall aim at increasing the credit resources available for low-cost housing as well as orienting lending practices towards the needs of low-cost homes. Likewise, support shall be given government housing agencies to make them effective instruments for low-cost housing."
"116","Our Social Security System, for example, has finalized its plans for building 7,000 low-cost houses annually. This project is scheduled to start this year."
"117","In the drafting of this program, every possible reduction has already been made. The proposals have been subjected to ruthless scrutiny and pruning; only those that have met the strictest criteria of economy, efficiency, and necessity have been allowed to pass, and these often in severely reduced form."
"118","As evidence of this testing, I have laid down, in a proposal unprecedented in the history of Philippine budgeting, an absolute upper limit on the level of current expenditures. For this fiscal year, current expenditures from the general fund will not be allowed to exceed P2 billion. This limit will hold absolutely, in spite of the fact that the cost of providing the services that these expenditures represent has risen considerably."
"119","Every other centavo that the government can raise will go into our capital program. But this money must not only be spent wisely; it must also be raised wisely."
"120","The justifications are compelling. We can certainly afford more taxes: The proportion of national income our government disposes of is about half the comparable percentage for Malaysia and about 50% less than that of Thailand, neither of which countries is conspicuously richer than we are. Furthermore, our present tax structure was essentially created before 1939, when our needs were much simpler, and when we had a colonial father to run to in case of need."
"121","Some of these rationalize the existing tax structure. These comprise the measures to promote a more equitable distribution of income tax collection between the national and local governments; to amend certain sections of the Tariff and Customs Code of the Philippines; and to revise the rates on the individual income tax, some rates downward and other rates upward."
"122","Other measures increase particular taxes, in the interests both of raising national savings and government revenues, and of discouraging conspicuous consumption, which is particularly harmful in this period of threatening unrest. These measures include increasing amusement taxes and specific taxes on certain distilled spirits and fermented liquors; requiring the payment of certain charges for foreign travel and for the registration of motor vehicles; increasing the rates of corporate income tax; and increasing the specific tax on oils and other fuels."
"123","By all these means, we hope to raise by prudent methods about P1 billion for capital projects over the next four years. Our past performance guarantees that the funds will be spent wisely; and if these measures are passed, especially the last, there will be an additional guarantee, in that we shall be spreading more widely the national stake in economic development, and hence the national determination that economic development does take place."
"124","We are also determined that this development should be primarily in the hands, and in the benefit, of Filipino nationals. But this places on us the obligation of making clear precisely what the conditions are that we impose on foreign investment. This we have already done in general principle, with the passage of the Investment Incentives Act, but there are a few particular uncertainties that must be cleared up immediately."
"125","A second uncertainty concerns the definition of the term national treatment with respect to foreign investment, especially in the fields of manufacturing, commerce, and finance. This should be cleared up by congressional action."
"126","Finally, the mining law should be revised to encourage exploration for domestic sources of petroleum. The present law classifies the processing of petroleum from domestic sources as a public utility, and is hence severely restrictive to foreigners; but it does not so restrict the processing of petroleum from foreign sources. Thus, our petroleum industry remains heavily import-dependent. Domestic entrepreneurs have the incentive to prospect for oil here, but not the resources. Foreign companies have the resources and knowledge, but not the incentive."
"127","It is difficult to justify this policy, especially in the present circumstances. The discovery here of oil in commercial quantities would be a tremendous asset, not only to our international reserves but also to our national security. We should no longer deny ourselves this possible good fortune."
"128","A realistic tax program, one attuned to the development requirements as well as the structure of our society, is now imperative. We must produce a system which would not only increase tax revenues for financing intensified government action in economic development but also distribute the tax burden fairly and justly. The rich, rather than the poor, should bear the greater weight of the tax responsibility."
"129","I propose tax measures for the following special funds, and their corresponding uses:"
"130","But that conference was only a preliminary exchange of views. The actual negotiations might take place in a few months; and for this, preparations must be undertaken immediately. Furthermore, the outcome of the negotiations will be a new treaty of economic relations between the Philippines and the United States, to replace the Laurel-Langley Agreement. Congress, as well as the Office of the President, is therefore involved, and Congress most directly, for it will have the final responsibility for the result."
"131","Committees should therefore immediately be set up in Congress to discuss these questions. Our entire economic relationship with the United States should be reviewed. We must attempt to gauge the national feeling as to what concessions we are willing to grant the Americans, and what we wish to accept from them in return. We must send to the United States a well-prepared negotiating panel, with Congress and private business well represented."
"132","Our economic relations with other countries also need to be tidied up. There are treaties already negotiated and awaiting approval with the United States on tax relations, and with Japan, Germany, and Sweden. Action should be taken on these as soon as possible, and in accordance with the will of Congress."
"133","As a last measure in the field of international economic relations, we must increase our international bargaining power. Alone, we are economically weak against the industrial giants of the world; in union with similar countries in the Southeast Asian region, we can carry a little more weight. Our relations with these countries will be examined; we are particularly interested in the idea of a regional payments union."
"134","Other measures are needed as well to increase productivity and efficiency in our traditional export industries, especially sugar, coconut products, and mineral production. And we must continue to attempt the restriction of nonessential imports. The measures currently in force have achieved some success, and there is hope that more restrictive measures will not be necessary."
"135","By these and similar measures, of which I shall submit full particulars as the session progresses, our balance of payments may be improved to the extent and measure necessary."
"136","The record of performance as well as its criticism has been submitted to the sovereign people."
"137","The popular mandate in the last elections was clear: It was a mandate for the vigorous pursuit of a policy of performance directed to the improvement of the lives of the people, but especially in terms of their basic needs—food, clothing, shelter, and education."
"138","This was not only a mandate for performance, but a verdict against excessive politics. On this point there can be no mistaking the popular will and temper."
"139","The election of 1967 has just occupied our nation. Now the signs indicate excessive political activity for 1969."
"140","I ask you to unite with us now in a concerted effort to promote our development efforts because this year should afford us a respite from politics and partisanship. This is our last year for constructive legislation. The 1969 elections should not be allowed to engage our thoughts and energies now and deflect us from the more urgent tasks demanded by the welfare of our people."
"141","Those who persist in politicking at so late or so early an hour deserve the reproach and censure of the whole nation."
"142","This is one of the tragedies of our democracy. But under my administration all parties have agreed by law to limit the period of political activity to three months for the local level and five months for the national level. This decision we all welcome as a guarantee against either majority or minority party members being guided by narrow selfish interest, their eyes dimmed by the prospect of the next election no matter how distant it may be, to the prejudice of the entire nation."
"143","The need of the hour is to have men whose perceptions are clear. We must break from the crippling habits of the past. Let us cultivate only those ways and customs that will make us an effective and progressive people."
"144","I appeal to all, whatever be your party or whether partyman or not, to discard politics, at least this year. There will be enough time for the cruel, pitiless, exhausting, time-consuming, and often sterile and pointless pursuit of politics in 1969."
"145","History may not record what we say. But it will record what we do. Let us now discard the pernicious habits of the past."
"146","I hope and pray that the high-minded and noble responsibility of lawmaking will prevail over partisanship and personal ambition."
"147","To change their lives, men must first change themselves. The challenge of nation-building is first of all a call to character-building."
"148","It is the business of a free people to develop habits proper to freedom to be purposeful, active, energetic, and strong. We must, at the very least, continue the pace that has been set in the past two years, the pace and tempo that mark a nation of achievers."
"149","Thus, may our people achieve their own development and write their own story of nation-building."
"150","From a race despondent, weak, vacillating, resigned, and helpless, groping for salvation, to a nation confident, bold, and resolute, seeking not survival alone but progress."
"151","From a nation of the ningas cogon to a nation of achievers."
"152","Let this be our epic of nation-building."
