Comrades! 

　　I was commissioned by the 12th Central Committee to report to the General Assembly. 

　　I. Historical Achievements and Tasks of the Conference The

　　Twelfth National Congress of the Party adhered to and developed the line of the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee and put forward a program for comprehensively creating a new situation in socialist modernization. Since the 12th National Congress, the Party Central Committee has held seven plenary meetings and a national representative meeting to make timely and correct decisions on a series of major issues, effectively promoted reform and opening up, and strengthened the building of material and spiritual civilization. 

　　Starting from the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee, after the Twelfth National Congress, the conference will last for nine years. In the past nine years, on the basis of the tremendous achievements in socialist construction since the founding of the People's Republic of China, a new stage of the party's historical development has been opened up, and the country's appearance has undergone profound changes. 

　　We firmly grasp the center of economic construction and make the national economy continue to grow steadily. In the past nine years, the gross national product, the state’s fiscal revenue, and the average income of urban and rural residents have roughly doubled. It now appears that the goal of achieving the economic development proposed by the 12th National Congress by the end of this century is completely certain. 

　　With the development of production, some serious social and economic problems that have long plagued us have begun to be solved, or solutions have been found: 

　　- The vast majority of the billion people have lived a life of food and clothing. Some areas have begun to move towards a well-off life. In some areas, the problem of food and clothing has not yet been fully resolved, but it has also improved. 

　　-- The urban and rural areas have opened up employment opportunities, and the newly employed labor force in the city has reached 70 million. In rural areas, township and village enterprises have sprung up, and 80 million farmers have been transferred or partially transferred to non-agricultural industries. 

　　-- The market supply has changed a lot, basically reversing the long-term serious shortage of consumer goods in the past. 

　　-- The situation of serious imbalances in the major proportion of the national economy has changed significantly, and has gradually shifted to the track of general coordinated development. 

　　It should be said that these nine years have been the fastest growing economic strength of the country since the founding of the People's Republic of China, and the people have received the most benefits. In the 20 years before the beginning of the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee in the late 1950s, under the influence of the "Left" guiding ideology, "taking class struggle as the key link", economic development has been repeatedly frustrated, and people's lives have improved little. The situation is in stark contrast.

　　All the achievements made in China's economic construction in the past nine years are inseparable from the resolute promotion of comprehensive reforms and opening up on the basis of bringing order out of chaos. 

　　Reform and opening up have broken through the rigid economic system and made the economy active. The socialist commodity economy is booming in an unstoppable trend. The coastal areas, from south to north, are forming broad open frontier zones. Relying on the enthusiasm of the masses, productivity has gained new liberation. 

　　Reform and opening up have also brought about a new liberation of the national spirit. Many old ideas that have long suffocated people's minds have been greatly affected. Active change, courage to develop, stress practical results, and begin to form a trend. As time goes by, people will see more clearly that the reason why these nine years are extraordinary is that the world’s attention is due to the fact that many new ideas that adapt to the trend of social progress are generated in this period, with a new system of pioneering significance. The foundation was laid at this time. The reform of the socialist system is another revolution in terms of the breadth and depth of social change. 

　　In order to ensure the smooth progress of economic construction and reform and opening up, our party has led the people in the political, ideological, cultural, national defense, diplomatic and other fields to carry out a lot of work and achieved remarkable results: 

　　-- The political situation of stability and unity has been consolidated and developed. This is based on adhering to the four basic principles and promoting construction and reform, properly handling various social contradictions, and promptly eliminating the results of various "left" and right interference. Social security has clearly improved. Opposing the healthy development of the bourgeois liberalization struggle has raised people's awareness and further accumulated experience of not relying on political movements and relying on positive education and correct criticism to oppose false ideas. In the profound reforms of comprehensive reform, maintaining stability and unity is very necessary and difficult. 

　　-- The building of socialist democracy and the legal system has gradually developed. The constitution-based socialist legal system was initially formed. The political life of the people is becoming increasingly active. The patriotic united front has expanded unprecedentedly. The multi-party cooperation and consultation system under the leadership of the Communist Party has played a positive role. The brotherhood of all ethnic groups is more consolidated. 

　　-- There has been important progress in the building of socialist spiritual civilization. Ideal education, moral education and legal education are widely spread throughout the society. Education, science, culture, art, journalism, publishing, health, and sports are thriving. Nine-year compulsory education is gradually being implemented.

　　-- National defense construction has achieved a strategic shift from the guiding ideology. The military's reorganization and reform have made great achievements. At the same time of the disarmament of millions, revolutionary, modernized, and regularized construction has made new progress, and the defensive combat capability has been improved. The People's Liberation Army has made tremendous contributions in defending the motherland, disaster relief and participation in socialist construction. 

　　-- In accordance with the principle of "one country, two systems", China, Britain and China have reached an agreement on resolving the Hong Kong and Macao issues. We must also strive to achieve a peaceful solution to the Taiwan issue in accordance with this principle. History will prove that the realization of the concept and practice of national unity under "one country, two systems" is a great creation of the political wisdom of the Chinese nation. 

　　-- According to the international situation and the needs of China's modernization drive, we will adjust the diplomatic structure and the party's external relations around the two major themes of peace and development, and develop foreign policies of independence, opposition to hegemonism, and safeguarding world peace. We have more friends in the world. 

　　Comrades! The practice in the past nine years proves that our party is not a great, glorious, and correct party. It proves that the line since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee is a correct line of Marxism. This line is the crystallization of the wisdom of the party and the people and the crystallization of the collective wisdom of the party Central Committee. In the formation and development of this line, in the decision-making of a series of key issues, in the development of the new situation of construction, reform and opening up, Comrade Deng Xiaoping made Marxist theoretical courage, truth-seeking spirit, rich experience and vision. A major contribution. The achievements in the past nine years have been the result of the united struggle of the people of all nationalities in the country. Please allow me, in the name of the Communist Party of China, to thank the people for their trust and support for our party. All the Chinese people who have personally experienced these great changes in the past nine years and contributed their own strength, all the descendants of the Yellow Emperor who care about the fate of the motherland, have reason to be proud of the historic changes in our country.

　　However, we have no reason to be complacent. We must be soberly aware that there are still many problems and difficulties we face, more than expected. We still have a lot of mistakes in our leadership work. The old and new systems are alternating, many systems are still not perfect, and the management and supervision of all aspects cannot keep up with the development of the situation. The tendency to rush to seek success in economic work still exists, and the contradiction between total social demand and total supply has not been alleviated. The bourgeois liberalization trend has a market, and the rigid thinking still binds the minds of some comrades. In particular, bureaucratism and corruption existed at different levels in many links, and the whole party comrades and the masses are very dissatisfied. We must face it squarely, work hard to eliminate it, and live up to the expectations of the people. 

　　We must also be soberly aware that we will have a longer journey and a more difficult task. Our original foundation is very poor. There have been too many delays in the past, and it is still quite backward. In today's world, the new technological revolution is developing rapidly, market competition is intensifying, and international politics is changing. The challenges we face are urgent and severe. If we do not know enough about this situation and do not redouble our efforts, our country and nation may be even more backward, and the world will not have the status we deserve. History has determined that our generation and the next generation of Chinese people, first of all communists, must wake up, unite and rise up. 

　　The central task of this conference is to accelerate and deepen reforms. Reform is the only way to revitalize China. It is the aspiration of the people, the trend of the times, and irreversible. We must sum up experience, adhere to and develop the line since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee, further define the basic principles for future economic construction, economic system reform, and political system reform, and determine the basic policy for strengthening party building in reform and opening up. Correctly solving this task will effectively promote the unity of the whole party and the unity of the party and the people of all ethnic groups, and ensure that we continue to advance along the socialist road with Chinese characteristics. 

　　Second, the primary stage of socialism and the party's basic line A

　　correct understanding of the historical stage in which our society is now is the primary issue of building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the fundamental basis for our formulation and implementation of correct lines and policies.

　　Our party has a clear answer to this question: China is in the primary stage of socialism. This assertion includes two meanings. First, our society is already a socialist society. We must persist and not leave socialism. Second, China’s socialist society is still at its infancy. We must proceed from this reality, and we cannot go beyond this stage. Under the specific historical conditions of modern China, it is not a recognition that the Chinese people can embark on the socialist road without going through the stage of full development of capitalism. It is a mechanistic theory on the issue of revolutionary development, an important source of understanding of right-wing mistakes; Great development can cross the primary stage of socialism, is an imaginary theory on the issue of revolutionary development, and is an important source of understanding of the "left" error.

　　Our country turned out to be a semi-colonial and semi-feudal power. In the more than one hundred years since the middle of the last century, after repeated contests by various political forces, after many failures of the old democratic revolution and the ultimate victory of the new democratic revolution, the road to capitalism has become unreachable in China. The way out is to overthrow the reactionary rule of imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism under the leadership of the Communist Party and take the socialist road. However, it is precisely because our socialism is born out of a semi-colonial and semi-feudal society, and the level of productivity lags far behind the developed capitalist countries. This determines that we must go through a very long initial stage to realize many other countries. Industrialization and commercialization, socialization, and modernization achieved under capitalist conditions. After more than 30 years of socialist development, what is the current situation in China? On the one hand, the socialist economic system based on the public ownership of production materials, the socialist political system of the people's democratic dictatorship, and the guiding position of Marxism in the field of ideology have been established, the exploitation system and the exploiting class have been eliminated, and the national economic strength has Great growth, education, science and culture have developed considerably. On the other hand, the population is large, the foundation is thin, and the per capita gross national product still ranks behind the world. The prominent scene is: more than one billion people, 800 million in the countryside, basically using hand tools to eat rice; some modern industries, with a large number of industries that lag behind the modern level for decades or even hundreds of years; Developed regions, along with the vast number of underdeveloped regions and poverty-stricken regions, exist simultaneously; a small number of world-class science and technology, and the general level of science and technology are not high, and illiterate and semi-literate people still account for nearly a quarter of the population. The backwardness of productivity determines that in the aspect of production relations, the degree of socialization of production necessary for the development of socialist public ownership is still very low, the commodity economy and the domestic market are very underdeveloped, the natural economy and the semi-natural economy account for a considerable proportion, and the socialist economic system still Immature and imperfect; in the superstructure, a series of economic and cultural conditions necessary for building a highly socialist democracy are not sufficient. Feudalism, capitalist decadent ideas and small production habits have extensive influence in society, and often Invade party cadres and national civil servants. This situation shows that we are still far beyond the primary stage of socialism today.

　　Building socialism in a backward eastern power like China is a new topic in the history of the development of Marxism. The situation we are facing is neither the construction of socialism on the basis of the high development of capitalism envisaged by the founders of Marxism, nor the same as other socialist countries. It is not acceptable to copy books, and to copy foreign countries. It is necessary to start from the national conditions, combine the basic principles of Marxism with the realities of China, and open up a socialist road with Chinese characteristics in practice. On this issue, our party has made useful explorations, achieved important achievements, and experienced many twists and turns, and paid a huge price. ((1)(2)) 

　　Since the late 1950s, due to the influence of the "Left" error, we have been eager to seek success, blindly pursuing purity, thinking that relying on the mass movement alone, we can make the productivity increase sharply and think that socialist ownership is The bigger the form, the better. We have also pushed the task of developing productive forces to a secondary position for a long time. After the basic completion of socialist transformation, we also "take class struggle as the key link." Many things that constrain the development of productive forces that do not have the essential attributes of socialism, or that are only suitable for certain special historical conditions, are adhered to as "socialist principles"; many are conducive to the development of productive forces under socialist conditions. The production of commodification, socialization, and modernization is opposed as "capitalism restoration." The resulting excessively single ownership structure and rigid economic system, as well as the excessively concentrated political system associated with this economic system, severely constrained the development of productive forces and the socialist commodity economy. This kind of situation teaches us to understand the basic national conditions clearly and to understand the historical stage of socialism in our country is an extremely important issue.

　　Then, what is the historical stage of China’s primary stage of socialism? It does not refer to the initial stage of any country's entry into socialism, but specifically refers to the specific stage that China must undergo when building socialism under the conditions of backward productivity and underdeveloped commodity economy. From the basic completion of the socialist transformation of the private ownership of production materials in the 1950s to the basic realization of socialist modernization, it takes at least a hundred years to belong to the primary stage of socialism. This stage is different from the transitional period in which the socialist economic foundation has not yet been laid, and is different from the stage in which socialist modernization has been achieved. The main contradiction we face at this stage is the contradiction between the growing material and cultural needs of the people and the backward social production. Class struggle will exist for a long time within a certain scope, but it is no longer a major contradiction. In order to solve the main contradictions at this stage, it is necessary to vigorously develop the commodity economy, increase labor productivity, and gradually realize the modernization of industry, agriculture, national defense, and science and technology, and to this end reform the production relations and the parts of the superstructure that are not adapted to the development of productivity. 

　　In summary, the primary stage of socialism in China is the stage of gradually getting rid of poverty and getting rid of backwardness; it is the stage of agricultural countries based on manual labor with a majority of agricultural population, and gradually becomes a stage of modern industrialized countries with a majority of non-agricultural population. It is a stage in which the semi-natural economy of the natural economy accounts for a large proportion and becomes a highly developed commodity economy; it is the stage of establishing and developing a dynamic socialist economic, political, and cultural system through reform and exploration; it is the rise of the whole people and hardship. Entrepreneurship and the realization of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. From the reality of the primary stage of socialism, what guidelines should we establish in the long run? 

　　First, we must concentrate on modernization. The fundamental task of a socialist society is to develop productive forces. In the initial stage, in order to get rid of poverty and backwardness, development productivity is especially the center of all work. Whether it is conducive to the development of productive forces should be the starting point for us to consider all issues and the fundamental standard for testing all work. We must always carry forward the spirit of hard struggle, diligently build the country, and diligently do all the work. Second, we must adhere to comprehensive reforms. Socialism is a society that is advancing in reform. In the initial stage, especially in the current period, reform has become an urgent historical requirement because of the long-term rigid system that has severely constrained the development of productivity. Reform is the self-improvement of socialist production relations and superstructure, and is the driving force for promoting all work.

　　Third, we must adhere to opening up to the outside world. Contemporary international economic relations are getting closer and closer, and no country can seek development in a closed state. Building socialism on an inferior basis, especially developing foreign economic and technological exchanges and cooperation, striving to absorb the achievements of world civilization and gradually narrowing the gap with developed countries. Retreat and self-defense can only be more and more backward. 

　　Fourth, we must take public ownership as the mainstay and vigorously develop a planned commodity economy. The full development of the commodity economy is an insurmountable stage of social and economic development and an indispensable basic condition for realizing the socialization and modernization of production. In terms of ownership and distribution, the socialist society does not require pure and pure, absolute average. In the initial stage, it is especially necessary to develop a variety of economic components under the premise of public ownership, and to implement a variety of distribution methods under the premise of distribution according to work, and encourage some people to adopt honest labor and legality under the goal of common prosperity. The business is getting rich first. 

　　Fifth, we must work hard to build democratic politics on the premise of stability and unity. Socialism should have a high degree of democracy, a complete legal system and a stable social environment. In the initial stage, there are many factors of instability, and it is especially important to maintain stability and unity. The internal contradictions of the people must be properly handled. The people's democratic dictatorship cannot be weakened. The construction of socialist democracy is not only because of the deep influence of feudal autocracy, but also has special urgency. Because it is restricted by the conditions of historical society, it can only be carried out in an orderly and orderly manner. 

　　Sixth, we must work hard to build spiritual civilization under the guidance of Marxism. In accordance with the resolutions on the construction of spiritual civilization in the Sixth Plenary Session of the Twelfth Central Committee, in accordance with the requirements of "having ideals, ethics, culture, and discipline", the ideological and moral qualities and scientific and cultural qualities of the entire nation will be improved. Our modernization and reform and opening up have greatly promoted the building of socialist spiritual civilization, and at the same time put high demands on it. Efforts should be made to form theoretical guidance, public opinion power, values, cultural conditions and social environment conducive to modernization and reform and opening up, overcome the narrow vision and conservative habits of small production, resist the decadent ideas of feudalism and capitalism, and invigorate the country. The people of the people are dedicated to the great enthusiasm and creative spirit of the modernization cause.

　　Comrades! In the primary stage of socialism, the basic line of socialism with Chinese characteristics is to lead and unite the people of all nationalities in the country, take economic construction as the center, adhere to the four basic principles, adhere to reform and opening up, be self-reliant, and work hard. Struggle to build China into a prosperous, democratic, and civilized modern socialist country. Adhering to the socialist road, upholding the people's democratic dictatorship, upholding the leadership of the Communist Party of China, and upholding the four basic principles of Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought are the foundation of our country. Adhering to the general policy of reform and opening up is the new development of the party's line since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee. It gives the four basic principles a new era. Adhere to the four basic principles and adhere to the two basic points of reform and opening up, intertwined, interdependent, and unified in the practice of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. We cannot look at the four basic principles from a rigid point of view. Otherwise, we will doubt and even deny the general policy of reform and opening up. Nor can we view reform and opening up from the perspective of liberalization, or we will leave the socialist track. In the primary stage, before we have not got rid of the underdevelopment, the idea of ​​bourgeois liberalization that denies the socialist system and advocates the capitalist system will exist for a long time. If the mind is rigid and does not reform and open up, it will not be able to better demonstrate the superiority of socialism and enhance the attraction of socialism. It will actually encourage the growth and spread of the bourgeois liberalization. Excluding the interference and influence of the two wrong ideas of rigidity and liberalization will follow the whole process of the primary stage of socialism. Since the "Left" accumulation is very deep, because the resistance to reform and opening up mainly comes from this kind of accumulation, in general, overcoming rigid ideas is a major task for a long period of time. In short, taking economic construction as the center and sticking to two basic points, this is our main experience. This is the main content of the party's basic line in the primary stage of socialism. 

　　III. About the Economic Development Strategy

　　In the primary stage of socialism, the historical issue to be solved in the development of social productive forces is to realize the commercialization, socialization, and modernization of industrialization and production. China's economic construction shoulders the dual task of focusing on promoting the traditional industrial revolution and catching up with the world's new technological revolution. To complete this task, we must work hard through long-term, step-by-step efforts.

　　After the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the Party, the strategic deployment of China's economic construction is roughly divided into three steps. The first step is to achieve a doubling of the gross national product than in 1980 to solve the problem of food and clothing for the people. This task has been basically achieved. In the second step, by the end of the century, the gross national product will double again and the people’s lives will reach a comfortable level. In the third step, by the middle of the next century, the per capita gross national product will reach the level of moderately developed countries, and the people's lives will be more affluent and basically modernized. Then, on this basis, move on. 

　　Now, the most important thing is to take the second step. Achieving the second step, China’s modernization will achieve new and great progress: social and economic benefits, labor productivity and product quality have improved markedly, and the gross national product and the output of major industrial and agricultural products have increased substantially, and the per capita gross national product is in the world. The number of places occupied has risen significantly. The main areas of industry are technically close to the level of the developed countries in the 1970s or early 1980s, and the technical level of the agricultural and other industrial sectors will also be greatly improved. The towns and most of the rural areas have popularized junior high school education, and large cities have basically popularized high school and equivalent high school vocational and technical education. The people will be able to live a relatively well-off life. In a country with a large population and a backward base, the people are generally well-fed and living in peace and contentment, which is undoubtedly a magnificent and very difficult undertaking. 

　　To achieve the goal of the second step, we have many favorable conditions and many difficulties and contradictions. The focus of the contradiction is that the benefits of economic activities are too low. Only by doing a good job in improving economic efficiency and striving for progress every year can we gradually alleviate the contradiction of China's large population, relatively insufficient resources, and serious shortage of funds, and ensure that the national economy continues to develop at a relatively high speed. Therefore, we must unswervingly implement the strategy of focusing on efficiency, improving quality, coordinating development, and stabilizing growth. The basic requirement of this strategy is to strive to improve product quality, emphasize product marketability, reduce material consumption and labor consumption, achieve rational allocation of production factors, improve capital use efficiency and resource utilization efficiency. In the final analysis, it is to focus on extensive management. Gradually turn to the track of intensive management. To this end, we must focus on the following three important issues. 

　　(1) Put the development of science and technology and education at the forefront, and turn economic construction to the track of relying on scientific and technological progress and improving the quality of workers.

　　Modern science and technology and modern management are the decisive factors for improving economic efficiency and the main pillar for China's economy to move toward a new stage of growth. We must be soberly aware that technology is backward, management is backward, and there is no way out by consuming large amounts of resources to develop the economy. Without scientific advancement and scientific management, it is impossible to produce enough food and other agricultural products on limited arable land. It is impossible to maintain the current level of food and clothing in the case of increasing population, let alone advance to a well-off society and even higher levels. The development of industry and other sectors is unsustainable without changing the backwardness of design, outdated equipment, rough craftsmanship and lax management. The product level is low, the quality is poor, the consumption is high, and the cost is high. Not only does it destabilize resources, it can not alleviate the contradictions in China's social and economic life, and it is also untenable in the competition of the international market. Especially in the context of the rapid development of the world's new technological revolution, if we do not seize the opportunity and catch up, we will not be able to shorten the gap between our economy and technology and developed countries. All this shows that the advancement of science and technology and the improvement of management level will fundamentally determine the progress of China's modernization drive and be a major event concerning the rejuvenation of the nation. 

　　Accelerating scientific and technological progress should be based on China's reality, look to the world, and select the direction and focus of development. The primary task of science and technology is to revitalize the national economy. It is necessary to focus on promoting the modernization of industrial technology and equipment for mass production, so that the technical aspects of the key sectors of key industries such as agriculture, energy, raw materials, transportation, communications, and machinery manufacturing have been significantly improved; actively promoting universally applicable scientific and technological achievements and accelerating enterprise technology. Renovate and continue to implement the “Spark” plan for the development of the rural economy. At the same time, we must organize the capable and timely development of high-tech research, especially the research and development of microelectronics, information technology, bioengineering technology and new materials technology, continue to strengthen basic research, and vigorously develop soft science. We must speed up reforms, form a mechanism that closely integrates science and technology with the economy, enhance the motivation and pressure for enterprises, especially large-scale key enterprises, to apply scientific and technological achievements, promote the development of technology markets and the process of commercialization of technological achievements, and shorten the cycle of scientific research results applied to production and construction. . We must continue to actively introduce foreign advanced technologies and make them closely integrated with domestic scientific and technological research, and effectively strengthen the digestion, absorption and innovation of imported technologies. It is recommended that the State Council formulate a medium- and long-term scientific and technological development program, rationally organize national science and technology forces, work together, and implement as soon as possible.

　　Fundamentally speaking, the development of science and technology, the revitalization of the economy, and even the progress of the entire society depend on the improvement of the quality of laborers and the cultivation of a large number of qualified personnel. Education is the foundation. We must persist in placing development education in a prominent strategic position and strengthen intellectual development. With the development of the economy, the state will increase education funding year by year, while continuing to encourage all sectors of society to raise funds to run schools. We must adhere to the policy of serving the socialist modernization drive, improve the educational structure, improve the quality of education, and overcome the tendency of education to deviate from reality and unilaterally pursue the rate of higher education. It is necessary to further create a social environment that respects knowledge and respects talents, continues to improve the working and living conditions of intellectuals, and strives to do its best to make the best use of it. It is necessary to give full play to the enthusiasm and creativity of the broad masses of workers, peasants, and intellectuals, and to reward all those who have made outstanding achievements in modernization. Great efforts must be made to strengthen the vocational education and continuing education of the workers through various channels, and strive to build a labor force with excellent quality and strict discipline. While giving full play to the role of our own scientific and technical personnel, we must also actively carry out international talent exchange work. 

　　(2) Maintaining a basic balance between total social demand and total supply, and rationally adjusting and transforming the industrial structure. 

　　In order to achieve stable development of the national economy on the basis of improving efficiency, we must strive to maintain a general balance between total social demand and total supply. The key to achieving this is to properly control the total scale of fixed assets investment in the whole society, adapt it to national strength, and reasonably grasp the extent of growth in consumption and make it compatible with the development of production. It is necessary to strengthen and improve the overall balance of the national economy and achieve the respective balances of finance, credit, foreign exchange and materials and the basic balance between them. In all practical work, we must be good at judging the situation, consciously and timely solving the imbalances in economic life, and making frequent adjustments to avoid large adjustments that are forced under serious imbalances. The current state organs, enterprises and institutions and social groups must be resolutely put an end to all kinds of squandering waste and extravagance. For the trend of excessive price increases that have occurred since this year, it is necessary to take resolute measures to further control it.

　　The balance of economic aggregates is closely related to the economic structure. Only when the total balance is achieved on the basis of reasonable structure can we achieve good macroeconomic benefits. The more this problem goes, the more prominent it will be because: First, in the process of moving toward a well-off level, the transfer of agricultural population to non-agricultural industries is accelerating, and the requirements for the development of basic industries and infrastructure are becoming more and more urgent. Residents have increased demand for higher-grade consumer goods, and their selectivity has increased significantly. All of this has put forward many new requirements for the transformation of industrial structure. Second, the development of the world's new technological revolution and the impact of changes in industrial structure, China's need to expand commodity exports, also requires corresponding adjustments and transformations of the industrial structure. Therefore, whether or not the rationalization of the industrial structure can be gradually realized will largely determine the future economic development and efficiency improvement.

　　China's domestic market is vast, and traditional industries have great room for development; the continuous expansion of opening up has provided us with a wide range of possibilities for making full use of foreign advanced technologies. It is necessary to combine the favorable conditions of these two aspects, focus on the use of advanced technology to transform and develop China's traditional industries, and pay attention to the development of high-tech emerging industries, and drive the entire national economy forward. Based on such considerations, the basic direction for the adjustment and transformation of the industrial structure in a relatively long period of time should be: insist on putting agriculture in a very important strategic position and comprehensively develop the rural economy; while vigorously developing the consumer goods industry, pay full attention to basic industries and Infrastructure, accelerate the development of the power-centered energy industry, the raw material industry focusing on steel, non-ferrous metals and chemical raw materials, the transportation industry and the communication industry with the integrated transportation system and information dissemination system as the main axis; efforts to revitalize the machinery and electronics industry To provide more and more advanced technology and equipment for modernization construction; to actively promote the commercialization of housing, and vigorously develop the construction industry, making it gradually become a pillar of the national economy. We must attach importance to the development of the tertiary industry and strive to achieve coordinated development of the primary, secondary and tertiary industries. We must strengthen the construction of basic industries and infrastructure, otherwise there will be no stamina for economic development. The development of basic industries and infrastructure cannot be carried out in isolation and should be coordinated with other developments. In the regional layout of industrial development, it is necessary to focus on the important role of the more developed eastern coastal areas, and gradually accelerate the development of the central and western regions so that different regions can develop their respective strengths and open each other and Equal exchanges form a rational regional division of labor and regional economic structure. For minority areas and poverty-stricken areas, necessary support should be given to further study and formulate policies that are in line with the actual conditions of these areas, enhance their vitality and promote economic prosperity in these areas. 

　　In order to realize the rationalization of industrial structure and enterprise organizational structure and achieve optimal allocation of resources, we must not only play the role of market and free competition, but also rely on the state to formulate correct industrial policies and corporate organizational structure policies, and use prices, finance, taxation, credit, etc. Economic leverage is used to intervene and regulate, to promote the healthy development of the economy through reform, and to create a better economic environment for development. In this way, it is possible to combine development and reform, planning and market, macro management and micro-invigoration, and to take a new path in planning work.

　　It is necessary to focus on the extremely important agricultural issues of relationship building and reform. The steady growth of agriculture and the improvement of the rural industrial structure are the basis for the long-term stable development of the entire national economy. In the primary stage of socialism, China's agricultural production conditions are still relatively backward, and development is still very unstable. Strengthening agricultural construction is particularly urgent and important. We must attach great importance to food production and strive for a large increase in grain output in the next decade or so. This is a basic condition for achieving the strategic goal by the end of this century. We must continue to rationally adjust the urban and rural economic layout and rural industrial structure, actively develop diversified operations and township enterprises, and combine it with supporting and promoting food production to maintain the overall development of the rural economy and the continuous growth of farmers' income. . It is necessary to consolidate and improve various forms of joint production contract responsibility system based on family business, actively encourage concurrent business operations, and establish a socialized service system. Where conditions permit, we must encourage and promote various forms of cooperation and cooperation on the basis of adhering to voluntary mutual benefit, and gradually achieve a reasonable scale of operation. It is necessary to pay attention to the support for urban and rural reform, handle urban-rural conflicts, and consolidate the alliance of workers and peasants While deepening rural reforms, the state, collectives, and individual peasants should increase agricultural input, and local financial resources should be used more in agriculture to strengthen the basic construction of farmland water conservancy, prevent floods and droughts, and improve the basic conditions of agriculture. Actively strengthen land management and strive to curb the phenomenon of large-scale reduction of cultivated land. We must vigorously increase the production and supply of agricultural materials such as fertilizers, plastic films, pesticides, diesel and agricultural machinery, and strengthen material support for agriculture. It is necessary to strengthen agricultural science and technology research, actively use scientific and technological achievements, and strive to cultivate and promote excellent varieties. While accelerating the development of agricultural production, it is necessary to properly guide and regulate the consumption structure of residents, especially the food structure, so as to adapt to the characteristics and production level of China's agricultural resources. In general, China's rural areas are still in the development period, many resources have not been rationally utilized, and the potential is great. The development prospects of agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, fishery and fishery industries and township and village enterprises are very broad. 

　　(3) Further expand the breadth and depth of opening up to the outside world and continuously develop foreign economic and technological exchanges and cooperation.

　　The world today is an open world. We have made great achievements in the implementation of the basic national policy of opening to the outside world. In the future, we must enter the world economic arena with a more courageous attitude, correctly select the import and export strategy and the strategy of utilizing foreign capital, and further expand economic and technological cooperation and trade exchanges with countries around the world, including developed and developing countries, in order to accelerate China's scientific and technological progress and Improve economic efficiency and create better conditions. 

　　The size of the ability to earn foreign exchange through exports determines to a large extent the extent and scope of China's opening up to the outside world, affecting the scale and progress of domestic economic construction. We must actively develop export industries and products that are competitive, effective, and efficient according to the needs of the international market and China's advantages, vigorously improve the quality of export commodities, rationally arrange the structure of export commodities, and explore the international market in a multi-faceted manner. Export trade continued to grow rapidly. At the same time, we will actively develop tourism, develop labor export and technology exports, and strive to increase non-trade foreign exchange income. The focus of imports should be on the introduction of advanced technologies and key equipment. All major equipment and other products suitable for domestic production must strive to improve product quality and performance, and be based on domestic. Actively develop alternative production of imported products, adopt necessary policies and measures, and accelerate the process of localization. In order to better expand foreign trade, we must resolutely and step-by-step reform the foreign trade system in the direction that is conducive to promoting foreign trade enterprises to be responsible for their own profits and losses, liberalization of operations, integration of industry and trade, and implementation of agency systems. 

　　For the utilization of foreign funds, it is necessary to maintain an appropriate scale and reasonable structure according to the repayment ability and domestic capital and material supporting capacity, and vigorously improve the comprehensive economic benefits of foreign capital use. It is necessary to further improve foreign-related economic legislation, implement preferential policies, and improve the investment environment so that foreign entrepreneurs can operate enterprises in China in accordance with international practices in order to attract more foreign investment. 

　　It is necessary to continue to consolidate and develop a gradually-developed open pattern of “special economic zones – coastal open cities – coastal economic development zones – the mainland”. Starting from the overall situation of the national economy, we will correctly determine the development and construction plans for special economic zones, open cities and regions, focus on developing an export-oriented economy, and actively carry out horizontal economic integration with the Mainland to give full play to their role as bases and windows in opening up.

　　Comrades! It is also important to point out here that population control, environmental protection and ecological balance are important issues that affect the overall situation of economic and social development. China has made remarkable achievements in population control, and the majority of family planning workers have made important contributions to this. However, it must be noted that China’s population base is large, and now it is the highest birth rate. Family planning work cannot be relaxed at all, otherwise it will inevitably affect the achievement of the established goals. It is necessary to emphasize eugenics and improve the quality of the population. At the same time, we must also pay attention to the trend of rapid population aging, and take correct countermeasures in a timely manner. While promoting economic construction, we must vigorously protect and rationally use all kinds of natural resources, strive to carry out comprehensive management of environmental pollution, strengthen the protection of the ecological environment, and combine economic, social and environmental benefits. 

　　Modernization of national defense is an important part of socialist modernization. In recent years, the broad masses of workers of the People's Liberation Army and the national defense industry and the national defense science and technology front have taken care of the overall situation of national construction, and have worked hard to support and participate in economic construction. At the same time, they have made very gratifying progress in promoting national defense modernization. We should strengthen national defense education and improve the people's national defense concept. In the future, on the basis of economic development, we should further develop national defense technology, improve military equipment, and push forward the modernization of national defense with Chinese characteristics. 

　　The realization of the economic development strategy fundamentally depends on the acceleration and deepening of economic system reform. At the same time, the deployment and implementation of reform must serve economic development. In this way, reform and construction can be mutually adapted and mutually promoted, and the healthy development of China's socialist commodity economy can be vigorously promoted.

IV. About Economic System Reform

　　China's economic system reform has made great achievements and injected new vitality into socialism. In order to accelerate and deepen reform, we must deepen the scientific understanding of the nature of China's economic system reform. The reforms we have carried out, including the development of a multi-ownership economy with public ownership as the main body, and even allowing the existence and development of the private economy are determined by the actual conditions of productivity in the primary stage of socialism. Only by doing so can we promote the development of productive forces. Some measures adopted in the reform, such as the development of the production materials market, the financial market, the technology market and the labor market, the issuance of bonds and stocks are inevitable with the development of socialized large-scale production and commodity economy, and are not unique to capitalism. of. Socialism can and should use them to serve itself and limit its negative effects in practice. In the past, many practices, such as directly issuing too many directive indicators to enterprises, implementing the distribution of unified purchase and supply and supply systems, some adopted in the domestic and international environment in the early days of the founding of the country to speed up the foundation of industrialization, and some were carried out from the revolutionary war years. It is not a fixed thing that the socialist system necessarily requires. Now the situation has changed a lot. Without reform, it will become an obstacle to the development of productive forces. In short, all the reforms we have carried out are conducive to the development of the socialist economy. Comrades of the entire party should further enhance and unify their understanding and push the reform forward even more firmly. 

　　The "Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on Economic System Reform" adopted by the Third Plenary Session of the 12th CPC Central Committee clearly pointed out that the socialist economy is a planned commodity economy based on public ownership. This is a scientific summary of our party's socialist economy, a major development of Marxism, and a basic theoretical basis for China's economic system reform.

　　The system of socialist planned commodity economy should be a system of internal unity between planning and market. On this issue, several basic concepts need to be clarified: First, the essential difference between the socialist commodity economy and the capitalist commodity economy lies in the different ownership systems. The socialist commodity economy based on the public ownership system has made it possible for the whole society to consciously maintain the coordinated development of the national economy. Our task is to be good at using the two forms and means of planning regulation and market regulation to turn this possibility into reality. The development of the socialist commodity economy is inseparable from the development and improvement of the market. The use of market regulation is by no means equal to capitalism. Second, the planning work must be based on the exchange of goods and the law of value. The direct management method based on the command plan cannot meet the requirements of the development of the socialist commodity economy. Plan adjustments and instructional plans cannot be equated. The scope of the mandatory plan should be gradually reduced through various methods such as signing the order contract between the state and the enterprise, between the enterprise and the enterprise in accordance with the principle of equivalent exchange. The state-to-business management should gradually shift to indirect management. Third, the scope of the plan and the market are all covering the whole society. The new economic operation mechanism should be a mechanism for the state to regulate the market and the market to guide enterprises. The state uses economic means, legal means and necessary administrative means to regulate the relationship between supply and demand in the market and create an appropriate economic and social environment to guide enterprises to make correct business decisions. Achieving this goal is a gradual process that must be actively created. 

　　The tasks of the current deepening reform are mainly: to transform the central part of the business operation mechanism, carry out the reform of the planning, investment, materials, finance, finance, foreign trade and other aspects in a phased manner, and gradually establish the basic system of the planned new commodity economy. frame. 

　　(1) Invigorating enterprises owned by the whole people in accordance with the principle of separation of ownership and management rights. 

　　Enterprises owned by the whole people cannot be operated by all the people. It is generally not suitable for direct operation by the state. To do so, it can only stifle the vitality and vitality of the enterprise. Separation of ownership and management rights, real management rights to enterprises, rationalization of the relationship between business owners, operators and producers, and the protection of the legitimate rights and interests of enterprises, so that enterprises truly operate independently, self-financing, is established Plan the inherent requirements of the commodity economic system. This will never change the nature of the enterprise's ownership by the whole country. It will only make the company more animated and make the superiority of the public sector economy fully utilized.

　　The specific form of separation of ownership and management rights may vary according to the nature of the industry, the size of the enterprise, and the technical characteristics. Regardless of the type of business responsibility system, legal means should be used to determine the relationship between the state and the enterprise, between the business owner and the business operator in a contractual form; all qualified operators must be produced through competition ((2)(3) The main reason for the company's operating results, including asset proliferation, as a reward and punishment operator, to promote a large number of entrepreneurs who are smart and capable of pioneering emerge in the market competition; they must implement the manager (management) responsibility system and improve the internal An economic responsibility system, rectification of labor discipline, and strict scientific management; we must pay attention to the enthusiasm and creativity of the employees, so that the management authority of the operators and the master status of the employees and the masses are unified, forming a new type of cooperation between producers and producers. relationship. The current implementation of various forms of business responsibility system, such as contracting and leasing, is a useful exploration for the separation of the two powers, and should be continuously reformed and improved in practice. 

　　The form of the shareholding system that emerged during the reform, including state holdings and participation in sectors, regions, enterprises, and individual shares, is an organizational form of socialist enterprise property and can continue to be tested. The property rights of some small-owned enterprises can be transferred to collectives or individuals for a fee. 

　　(2) Promoting the further development of horizontal economic integration. 

　　Horizontal economic integration is an inevitable trend of socialized large-scale production and socialist commodity economy. In recent years, the development of horizontal economy and the rise of corporate groups and enterprise groups have shown strong vitality. We must continue to advance in the deepening of reforms. 

　　The alliance between enterprises is the basic form of horizontal economic integration. We should resolutely abandon the concept of self-enclosed natural economy, change the backwardness of large, comprehensive, small and complete, and promote the rational flow of various production factors such as talents, capital, technology, resources, etc. through joint investment and mutual participation. Regroup. We should mainly focus on large and medium-sized enterprises, take high-quality brand-name products as the leader, and promote the combination of scientific research and production, and actively develop enterprise groups or enterprise groups to meet the requirements of specialized division of labor and economies of scale. We must give the joint decision-making power to the enterprise, adhere to the principles of fostering strengths and avoiding weaknesses, diversifying forms, voluntary mutual benefit, and common development, and prevent administrative measures to piece together various administrative companies.

　　To develop horizontal economic integration, we must give full play to the role of the city and build the city first and foremost into a multi-functional, modern economic center. The city must also simplify the administration of power, separate government and enterprises, open the door, and implement all-round opening, not only serving the city, but also serving the surrounding countryside and serving the entire economic zone it contacts. 

　　(3) Accelerate the establishment and cultivation of a socialist market system. 

　　The socialist market system includes not only commodity markets such as consumer goods and means of production, but also production factor markets such as capital, labor, technology, information and real estate; a single commodity market cannot play a role in market mechanisms. The socialist market system must also be competitive and open; monopolistic or fragmented markets cannot promote the efficiency of commodity producers, and closed markets are not conducive to the development of a rational domestic division of labor and the promotion of international trade. 

　　To establish a socialist market system, we must actively and steadily push forward price reforms and rationalize commodity prices and prices of various production factors. It is necessary to gradually establish a system in which a small number of important commodities and labor prices are managed by the state, and other large quantities of goods and services are regulated by the market. The price reform should be coordinated with the adjustment of the income policy to ensure that the people's actual living standards will not decline in the reform and gradually increase with the development of production. Actively develop new commodity circulation organizations, foreign trade organizations, financial organizations and technology, information and service networks that are self-employed, self-financing, and promote market development. Strengthen industrial and commercial administration and price management, strictly implement market management regulations, and form a normal market order. 

　　(4) Gradually improve the macroeconomic adjustment system based on indirect management.

　　The macro adjustment and the invigoration of the enterprise and the invigoration of the market are unified and indispensable. After leaving the macro adjustment, the market will be chaotic and the enterprise will be chaotic. However, the original direct management method is adopted to allocate and allocate production factors. Enterprises have no autonomy, the market is difficult to form, and the system of planned commodity economy cannot be established and developed. Therefore, it is necessary to accelerate the reform of macroeconomic management methods in favor of maintaining a basic balance between total social supply and total demand, promoting scientific and technological progress, and optimizing industrial structure. The focus of program management should be shifted to the formulation of industrial policies, and the use of various economic levers to promote the realization of industrial policies. Deepen the reform of the financial system, strengthen the position and role of banks in the macroeconomic regulation system, and appropriately control the scale of credit and money supply in accordance with the law of currency circulation; with the leadership of the central bank, the National Bank as the main body, the development of various financial institutions, the use of more Ways and a variety of financial instruments to gather and finance funds to promote coordinated economic growth and economic restructuring. Reform the fiscal and taxation system, rationally set up taxes and determine tax rates based on the principles of fair taxation, promotion of competition, and embodying industrial policies; implement a tax-sharing system on the premise of rationally dividing the central and local fiscal revenues and expenditures, and correctly handle central and local, state, The economic interests of enterprises and individuals. In a certain period of time, the state still needs to maintain the necessary direct control over a small number of key construction projects and special enterprises, as well as certain important and short-selling commodities, but it must also fully consider the interests of various parties and improve the control methods. 

　　We will promptly establish a complete system of economic laws and regulations, and strengthen judicial and serious law enforcement. For enterprises, markets and various economic sectors, it is necessary to implement necessary supervision and management, rectify and strengthen financial and economic laws, to protect the legitimate rights and interests of consumers and producers, and to safeguard the overall interests of the country. 

　　(5) Continue to develop a variety of ownership economies on the premise that public ownership is the mainstay.

　　The ownership structure of the primary stage of socialism should be based on public ownership. At present, other economic components other than ownership by the whole people have not developed too much, but they are still not enough. For urban and rural cooperative economies, individual economies and the private economy, they must continue to encourage their development. The public sector of the economy itself has many forms. In addition to ownership by the whole people and collective ownership, public-owned enterprises jointly established by the ownership of the whole people and collective ownership should be developed, as well as public-owned enterprises in the form of mutual participation by various regions, departments and enterprises. In different economic sectors and different regions, the proportion of various ownership economies should be allowed to vary. 

　　The private economy is an economic component of the existence of wage labor relations. However, under socialist conditions, it must be linked to the dominant public sector of the economy and be greatly influenced by the public sector of the economy. Practice has proved that a certain degree of development of the private economy is conducive to promoting production, activating the market, expanding employment, and better meeting the needs of the people in many aspects. It is a necessary and beneficial supplement to the public sector of the economy. Policies and laws on the private economy must be formulated as soon as possible to protect their legitimate interests and strengthen their guidance, supervision and management. 

　　Sino-foreign joint ventures, cooperative ventures and wholly foreign-owned enterprises are also necessary and beneficial supplements to China's socialist economy. The legitimate interests of foreign investors should be effectively protected to further improve the investment environment. 

　　(6) Implementing multiple distribution methods and correct distribution policies based on distribution according to work.

　　The distribution of the primary stage of socialism cannot be single. The principle we must adhere to is that the distribution according to work is the main body, and other modes of distribution are supplements. In addition to the main way of distributing labor according to labor and the income of individual labor, if a company issues bonds to raise funds, interest will be obtained by virtue of the debt; as the share economy is generated, dividends will appear; the income of the business operators includes Risk compensation; private companies employing a certain amount of labor will bring some non-labor income to business owners. These incomes, as long as they are legal, should be allowed. Our distribution policy is not only conducive to the business-oriented enterprises and honest labor individuals to get rich first, reasonably open the income gap, but also to prevent the disparity between the rich and the poor, adhere to the direction of common prosperity, and reflect the society under the premise of promoting efficiency. fair. For excessive personal income, effective measures should be taken to regulate; those who use illegal means to obtain huge profits must be severely sanctioned according to law. The main tendency in the current distribution is still to eat big pots, egalitarianism, and compare each other. It must continue to be overcome in ideological and practical work. All those who have the conditions should actively implement the piece rate wage system and the fixed wage system under the premise of strict quality management and quota management. 

　　The growth of consumption continues to outpace the growth of production, which is a problem that is easy to occur in the early stages of reform. It affects economic stability, weakens the stamina of economic development, and brings serious difficulties to reforms, which ultimately leads to a decline in people's actual living standards. The experience of many developing countries proves that the expansion of consumption will inevitably lead to the loss of vitality of the entire national economy. We must adhere to the principle of hard work and diligence in building the country for a long time. It is necessary to resolutely prevent consumption expansion and ensure that the growth rate of social consumption funds does not exceed the growth rate of distributable national income, and the growth rate of average wages of employees does not exceed the growth rate of labor productivity. It is necessary to form a mechanism for self-discipline of enterprises through deepening reforms, and at the same time establish an effective adjustment system and methods at the macro level. 

　　Every measure to deepen reforms, in the final analysis, must be conducive to improving social and economic benefits. A prominent problem currently affecting economic efficiency is the poor quality of many enterprises. It must be recognized that the quality of a country's products reflects the quality of the entire nation from one aspect. All departments, enterprises and all members of society must work hard to continuously improve the quality of our products.

　　The task of economic system reform is very arduous. We must not only eliminate or correct various obstacles to the development of productive forces in the relations of production, but also cultivate and establish new organizations, new mechanisms and new norms necessary for the development of productive forces. At present, there is a period of alternation between the old and new systems. It is difficult to completely avoid all kinds of contradictions and problems in economic life. The deepening of reform will lead to a more profound adjustment of the interests of all sectors of society, and there can be no resistance. We are reforming under conditions where the economic environment is still not relaxed, which in turn increases the difficulty of reform. We are inexperienced and it is inevitable that there will be mistakes in guiding the work. The quality of the cadre team and the people's ideological concepts are not fully adapted to the requirements of developing a socialist commodity economy. It now appears that the time required to establish a new institutional framework will be longer than originally estimated. On the one hand, we must further emancipate our minds and accelerate the pace of reform with greater determination. On the other hand, we must fully understand the arduousness and complexity of reforms, based on realistic conditions, in accordance with the objective requirements of economic development and institutional reform. The internal logic determines the key points of reform and carries out the phased implementation, so that the reform continues to make substantial progress. 

　　V. About political system reform

　　The development and deepening of economic system reform has placed increasingly urgent demands on political system reform. The process of developing a socialist commodity economy should be the process of building socialist democratic politics. Without political system reform, economic system reform cannot be ultimately successful. The Party Central Committee believes that the time has come to put the reform of the political system on the agenda of the entire party. Comrade Deng Xiaoping’s speech on the reform of the party and state leadership system at the enlarged meeting of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee in August 1980 was a guiding document for political system reform. The purpose of political system and economic system reform is to better develop social productive forces under the leadership of the party and the socialist system, and give full play to the superiority of socialism. In other words, we will eventually catch up with the developed capitalist countries economically, create higher and more effective democracy than these countries, and create more talents than these countries. These requirements should be used to test the effectiveness of the reform. China is a socialist country with people's democratic dictatorship, and the basic political system is good. However, there are some major defects in the specific leadership system, organizational form and working methods, mainly manifested in excessive power concentration, bureaucratic seriousness, and the influence of feudalism is far from being eliminated. To carry out political system reform is to promote the elimination of disadvantages and build socialist democratic politics with Chinese characteristics. The long-term goal of reform is to establish a socialist political system that is highly democratic, complete in law, efficient, and full of vitality. This is a long-term effort that can be achieved. 

　　Building socialist democracy is the same as the development of a socialist commodity economy. It is a gradual process of gradual accumulation. Our modernization construction faces complex social contradictions, requires a stable social and political environment, and must not engage in "great democracy" that undermines the country's legal system and social stability. The system of people's congresses, the system of multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of the Communist Party, and acting in accordance with the principle of democratic centralism are our characteristics and advantages. We must never lose these characteristics and advantages, copying the "separation of powers" and the West. The party takes turns to govern. The reform of the political system must gradually improve socialist democracy, improve the socialist legal system, strive to overcome the influence of bureaucracy and feudalism, and promote economic system reform and opening up to the outside world. The immediate goal of the reform is to establish a leadership system that is conducive to improving efficiency, enhancing vitality and mobilizing the polarity of all parties. All reform measures must focus on this goal and start from solving mature problems. 

　　(1) Implementing the separation of party and government

　　The Communist Party of China is the core of leadership for China's socialist cause. Under the new situation, only by improving the party's leadership system, leadership style and leadership style can we strengthen the party's leadership role. In recent years, we have done a lot of work in improving the leadership of the party and achieved certain results. However, the long-standing formation of party and government and the issue of party-government have not been fundamentally resolved. This problem is not resolved, the party’s leadership cannot be truly strengthened, and other reform measures are difficult to implement smoothly. Therefore, the key to political system reform is first and foremost the separation of party and government. The separation of party and government, that is, the separation of party and government functions. The party leads the people to enact the Constitution and laws, and the party should act within the scope of the Constitution and laws. The party leads the people to establish state power, mass organizations and various economic and cultural organizations. The party should ensure that the political power organization fully exerts its functions and should fully respect rather than arrange the work of mass organizations and enterprises and institutions. The party's leadership is political leadership, that is, political principles, political direction, leadership of major decisions, and recommendation of important cadres to state power organs. The main way for the party to exercise political leadership over state affairs is to make the party's claims become the will of the state through legal procedures, to drive the broad masses of the people through the activities of party organizations and the exemplary role of party members, and to realize the party's line, principles, and policies. The nature of the party and the state power organs are different, their functions are different, and their organizational forms and working methods are different. The party’s leadership system should be reformed, the functions of party organizations and state power should be clearly defined, and the relationship between party organizations and people’s congresses, governments, judicial organs, mass organizations, enterprises and institutions, and other various social organizations should be rationalized. They perform their duties and gradually move toward institutionalization. The situation at the central, local, and grassroots levels is different. The specific ways of separating party and government should also be different. The Party Central Committee should make decisions on major issues in various aspects such as internal affairs, foreign affairs, economy, and national defense. It is recommended that personnel should assume the leadership positions of the highest state power organs and exercise political leadership in all aspects of work. The local party committees of the provinces, municipalities and counties shall exercise political leadership over the work of the region on the premise of implementing the central line and ensuring the unification of national decrees. Their main responsibilities are: to implement the instructions of the central and higher-level party organizations; to ensure the implementation of the State Council and higher-level governments in the region; to make decisions on major local issues; to recommend important cadres to local authorities; to coordinate various regions in the region Organizational activities. Their relationship with local government organs at the same level should be explored in practice and gradually form norms and systems. The separation of party and government at the township and town levels can be resolved after the county-level relationship is straightened out. The role of the enterprise party organization is to ensure supervision, no longer implement the "one yuan" leadership of the unit, but should support the factory manager and the manager to assume full leadership responsibility. Among the institutions

　　In order to adapt to the change of the party's leadership style and mode of activity, it is necessary to adjust the party's organizational form and working organization. In the future, party committees at all levels will no longer set up full-time secretaries and standing committee members who are not in the government but are in charge of government work. Party committees should be small and sophisticated, and departments that overlap with government agencies should be revoked. The administrative affairs they now manage should be transferred to the relevant government departments. The existing party groups of various government departments are responsible for approving the party committees established by it, which is not conducive to the unification and effectiveness of government work, and should be gradually withdrawn. The Party's Disciplinary Inspection Committee does not handle cases of law and political discipline, and should concentrate on managing party discipline and assisting party committees in managing party style. At present, the party organizations of enterprises and institutions that are vertically led by the party organizations of higher-level administrative departments must gradually be changed by the local party committees. From party and government to the separation of party and government, it is a major reform of our party's leadership system. It must be pointed out that the party and government indifferently reduced the party's leading position and weakened the party's leadership role. Party and government separation can better realize the party's leadership role and improve the party's leadership level; the party and government do not divide the party into consideration. In order to grasp the construction of the party, the separation of the party and the government can guarantee that the "party must manage the party"; the party and government do not divide the party in the first line of administrative work, and it is easy to become an aspect of contradiction and even at the focus of contradiction. Only then can the party control the contradictions, take the overall situation, and truly play the role of all parties; the party and government do not divide the party in the position of direct implementers, and the separation of the party and the government can enable the party organizations to better exercise their supervisory functions and effectively prevent and overcome them. Bureaucracy. All party comrades should consciously, actively, and cheerfully invest in this reform to achieve this historic transformation. 

　　(2) Further decentralization of power. 

　　The phenomenon of excessive concentration of power is not only manifested in the excessive concentration of power of the administrative, economic, cultural organizations and mass organizations in the leading organs of the party committees, but also in the fact that the power at the grassroots level is excessively concentrated in the leading organs at higher levels. On the one hand, the leading organs have managed many things that should not be managed, not well managed, and cannot be managed. They are trapped in transactionalism and cannot extricate themselves. On the other hand, the grassroots lacks autonomy and the enthusiasm of the people is difficult to fully mobilize. An effective way to overcome this drawback is to decentralize power, which has been proven by rural reforms and should be further implemented in other areas.

　　Everything that is suitable for the following should be decided and implemented by the following. This is a general principle. In the relationship between the central and local governments, under the premise of ensuring the unification of national political orders, the central and local responsibilities should be gradually drawn out, and local affairs should be managed locally. The central responsibility is to put forward major policies and supervision. In the relationship between the government and enterprises and institutions, it is necessary to decentralize the management and management rights to enterprises and institutions in accordance with the principle of independent management and self-management, and gradually realize that the affairs of each unit are managed by the units themselves. The responsibility of the government is in accordance with laws and regulations. Serve and supervise the business. In the relationship between the party and the government and the mass organizations, we must give full play to the role of mass organizations and grassroots mass autonomous organizations, and gradually do things for the masses by the masses themselves. Localities, departments and units must establish a global concept and act in strict accordance with laws and regulations. In order to make enterprises fully motivated, in order to give full play to the role of cities in the development of a socialist commodity economy, decentralization must focus on expanding the power of central cities and enterprises. All intermediate levels shall not be withheld except for the power to stipulate devolution to cities and enterprises. This is an important measure to break the fragmentation. Decentralization involves many reforms of the rules and regulations. All levels and departments must combine the transformation of functions and reform institutions, conduct investigations and studies, carefully listen to the opinions of the grassroots, and make specific provisions one by one. 

　　(3) Reforming government work institutions. 

　　The phenomenon of bureaucracy still exists seriously in the political life of our party and country. Due to economic, cultural and social history, our struggle against bureaucracy will be long-term. The separation of party and government, the further decentralization of power, and the promotion of socialist democracy will all help to overcome bureaucracy. It should be noted that the government agencies are huge and bloated, with too many levels, unclear responsibilities, and wrangling with each other, which is also an important reason for the formation of bureaucracy. Therefore, we must make up our minds to carry out reforms from top to bottom for government agencies. It is suggested that the State Council immediately proceed to formulate a plan for reforming the central government agencies and submit them to the first session of the Seventh National People's Congress for review and approval before implementation.

　　In order to avoid revisiting the old road of “streamlining-expansion-re-simplification-re-expansion”, this institutional reform must grasp the key to transforming functions. In accordance with the requirements of economic system reform and separation of government and enterprise, the professional departments within the professional management departments and comprehensive departments should be merged and reduced, so that the government should shift from direct management to indirect management. It is necessary to proceed from the scientific and holistic nature of institutional allocation, appropriately strengthen decision-making consultation and adjustment, supervision, auditing, and information departments, transform the working methods of the integrated departments, and improve the government's ability to adjust and control macroeconomic activities. It is necessary to implement the principles of streamlining, unification, and efficiency, clean up and reorganize all administrative companies and institutions that have been upgraded in recent years, and revoke the institutions that have been set up by people, and reduce the number of people who are in the affairs department. In order to ensure the smooth progress of institutional reforms, it is necessary to carefully adjust the personnel in the institutional changes. To be able to work properly, personnel are properly arranged. Generally speaking, this institutional reform must be resolved on the personnel issue, mainly to adjust the structure and improve the quality. It is necessary to closely integrate personnel adjustment and training, and plan to step-by-step adjustment of some personnel to state organs and economic and cultural organizations that need to be strengthened. In order to consolidate the results of institutional reforms and put administrative management on the road to legalization, it is necessary to strengthen administrative legislation to provide basic norms and procedures for administrative activities. It is necessary to improve the administrative law of administrative organs, formulate administrative law, and use legal means and budgetary means to control institutional setup and staffing. It is necessary to establish an administrative responsibility system at all levels to improve work quality and work efficiency. It is necessary to formulate an administrative procedural law, strengthen the supervision of administrative work and administrative personnel, and investigate all administrative personnel's dereliction of duty, malfeasance and other violations of law and discipline. 

　　(4) Reforming the cadre personnel system.

　　The improvement of vitality, efficiency and enthusiasm cannot be separated from the reform of the cadre and personnel system. In recent years, we have taken some major measures in the reform of the cadre and personnel system and accumulated useful experience. However, the current cadre personnel system still has some major shortcomings, mainly: the concept of “national cadres” is too general, lacks scientific classification; management authority is too concentrated, and management and management are out of touch; management methods are old, hindering the growth of talents; Unsound, the lack of rule of law for the employer. This has caused us to face two major problems for a long time: First, it is difficult for young and talented people to stand out from the crowd, and second, it is difficult to avoid the unhealthy trend of employing people. The reform of the cadre and personnel system is to rationally decompose the "national cadres", change the status quo of centralized and unified management, establish a scientific classification management system, and change the status quo of all personnel with the single mode of party and government cadres to form different characteristics. The management system; changing the current situation of lack of democracy and legal system, and realizing the legal management and public supervision of cadres and personnel. 

　　At present, the focus of the reform of the cadre and personnel system is to establish a national civil service system, that is, to enact laws and regulations, and to conduct scientific management of personnel who exercise state administrative power and perform state official duties in the government. National civil servants are divided into two categories: government affairs and business. Administrative civil servants must be strictly managed in accordance with the Constitution and the Organic Law, implement a tenure system, and accept public supervision by the society. Party committees at the central and local levels of the Party shall, in accordance with legal procedures, recommend candidates for civil servants at all levels to the National People's Congress, and supervise and manage party members in civil servants. Business civil servants are managed in accordance with the National Civil Service Law and a permanent system is in place. Those who enter the business civil service team shall pass the statutory examinations and openly compete; their job responsibilities shall be clearly defined and their standards and procedures shall be determined according to law, and their promotion and reward shall be based on work performance; their training The rights to wages, benefits and retirement are guaranteed by law. The implementation of the national civil service system is conducive to strengthening and improving the party's leadership over personnel work, and is conducive to the creation of political activists and administrative administrators with both ability and political integrity, which is conducive to improving the efficiency of government work and the stability of state administration. Establishing and perfecting such a system requires a long process. At present, we must promptly formulate national civil service regulations and corresponding supporting measures, set up a national civil service management organization, and organize the National School of Administration.

　　While establishing the national civil service system, it is necessary to implement classified management of all types of personnel in accordance with the principle of separation of party and government, separation of government and enterprise, and close integration and reasonable control of management and management. Mainly: the leaders of the party organization and the staff of the organs, managed by party committees at all levels; the leaders and staff of the state power organs, judicial organs and procuratorial organs, and the establishment of a system similar to the national civil servants; the leaders of the mass organizations and The management personnel of staff, enterprises and institutions shall, in principle, be managed by their organizations or units in accordance with their respective articles of association or regulations. 

　　Regardless of which management system is implemented, the principles of focusing on performance, encouraging competition, democratic supervision, and open supervision must be implemented and embodied. The introduction of competition mechanism into enterprise management has created unprecedented conditions for outstanding entrepreneurs and various professionals to stand out from the crowd. It has and will continue to cause a series of changes in the personnel system of enterprises. We should adapt to this situation and constantly sum up practical experience so that the new corporate personnel system can be established and improved. The competition mechanism should also introduce management of other professionals. All walks of life must form different management methods and systems in accordance with the different laws of various talent growth, so that all kinds of specialized homes and business owners can emerge in batches and quickly grow into the backbone and backbone of all aspects. Outside the party, we must create social conditions in which people can move rationally and have choices in their careers, and break the stereotypes of resolute and creative attitudes such as seniority. In this way, people will do their best, show their strengths, and everyone will have a head start to enhance the vitality and vitality of the party and state organs as well as the whole society. 

　　(5) Establish a system of social consultation and dialogue. 

　　Correctly handling and coordinating various social interests and contradictions is a major issue under socialist conditions. The work of the leading organs at all levels can only be based on listening to the opinions of the masses in order to be realistic and avoid mistakes. The activities and difficulties faced by the leading organs can only be understood by the masses if they are understood by the masses. The demands and voices of the masses must be channeled regularly and smoothly, and there are suggestions for local mentions. The specific interests and specific opinions of this part of the masses are not the same as those of the masses. They also need opportunities and channels for mutual communication. Therefore, it is necessary to form a system for social consultation and dialogue, to achieve the situation in a timely, smooth and accurate manner, to express the situation, to communicate with each other and to understand each other.

　　The basic principle of establishing a system of social consultation and dialogue is to carry forward the fine tradition of "from the masses to the masses" and to increase the openness of the activities of the leading organs. The major situation allows the people to know that major issues are discussed by the people. At present, we must first formulate a number of provisions on the social consultation and dialogue system, and clarify which issues must be resolved by which units and which groups through consultation and dialogue. Negotiations and dialogues on major issues within the national, local, and grassroots units should be carried out at three different levels: national, local, and grassroots. The leading organs at all levels must regard it as a major event in leadership work. It is necessary to further develop the role of existing channels for consultation and dialogue and pay attention to opening up new channels. Through various modern news and propaganda tools, we should increase coverage of government affairs and party affairs activities, play the role of public opinion supervision, support the masses in criticizing the shortcomings in the work, oppose bureaucracy, and fight against various unhealthy trends. 

　　(6) Several systems for improving socialist democratic politics. 

　　The essence and core of socialist democratic politics is that the people are the masters of the country, truly enjoy the rights of all citizens and enjoy the power to manage the state and enterprises. At this stage, the construction of socialist democratic politics must focus on practical results, focusing on mobilizing the enthusiasm of the grassroots and the masses, starting from the things that can be done, and working on the improvement of the basic system. 

　　The system of people's congresses is the fundamental political system of our country. In recent years, the work of the people's congresses at all levels has made great progress. In the future, we should continue to improve the functions of the NPC and its Standing Committee, and strengthen legislative work and legal supervision. It is necessary to further close the contacts between the people's congresses at all levels and the masses so that the people's congresses can better represent the people and be supervised by the people. It is necessary to strengthen the organizational construction of the National People's Congress, especially its Standing Committee, and gradually realize the full-time membership of the committee members while gradually realizing the younger members. It is necessary to improve the rules of procedure and working procedures of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress and the special committees, and strengthen institutional development. 

　　The CPPCC is a patriotic united front organization that includes representatives of various democratic parties, various people's organizations, and all sectors of society. It is necessary to strengthen the organization and construction of the CPPCC itself, and gradually make the political consultation and democratic supervision of the major policies of the country and major issues of the masses of the people regular. We must adhere to the principle of "long-term coexistence, mutual supervision, courage, honor and disgrace", improve the multi-party cooperation and consultation system under the leadership of the Communist Party, and further play the role of democratic parties and non-partisan patriots in the political life of the country.

　　Mass organizations such as trade unions, the Communist Youth League, and the Women's Federation have always been the bridges and ties between the party and the government to contact the working class and the people, and have played an important role in the socialist democratic life. It is necessary to rationalize the relationship between the party and the administrative organization and the mass organizations, so that various mass organizations can carry out their work independently and in accordance with their respective characteristics, and can better express and maintain their respective representatives while maintaining the overall interests of the people throughout the country ((3)(4)). The specific interests of the masses. Mass organizations should also reform their organizational systems, change their modes of activities, actively participate in social consultation and dialogue, democratic management, and democratic supervision. They should focus their work on the grassroots level, overcome the "official" ethics and administrative tendencies, and win the trust of the masses, especially the grassroots. 

　　In recent years, the degree of democracy in our elections is constantly improving. However, the electoral system is still not sound enough, and the existing system has not yet been fully and effectively implemented. In the future, the will of the electors should be more fully respected and the electors have room to choose. It is necessary to continue to adhere to the system of differential elections in accordance with the law, improve the nomination methods for candidates, and improve the introduction methods for candidates. Practice has proved that when electing representatives of various congresses, it is not conducive to embody the will of the electors. In order to make candidates more representative, in addition to continuing to adhere to the system of regional elections in the future, it can be supplemented by the method of generating partial representation by sector elections and other means. 

　　The institutionalization of grassroots democratic life is the basis for ensuring that the working class and the masses are the masters of the country, mobilizing the polarity of all parties and maintaining the stability and unity of the entire society. At present, the phenomenon of violating the rights of the people still occurs from time to time. Therefore, it is imperative to formulate laws such as press and publication, association, assembly, and procession, establish a people's appeal system, guarantee the civil rights and freedoms stipulated in the Constitution, and at the same time, stop the abuse of rights and freedoms according to law. It must be pointed out that in some departments and grassroots units, feudal paternalistic leadership still exists. In order to break the conditions on which such conditions exist, it is necessary to formulate laws and regulations to promote the rational flow of personnel, establish a labor arbitration system, and actively promote the socialization of public welfare undertakings.

　　Our country is a multi-ethnic country. Maintaining the reunification of the motherland, upholding national equality, national unity and promoting the common prosperity of all ethnic groups are major issues concerning the destiny of the country. It is necessary to further improve the system of regional ethnic autonomy and vigorously cultivate minority cadres. We must continue to consolidate and strengthen the great unity of all ethnic groups, develop socialist ethnic relations of equality, unity, and mutual assistance, educate the whole party to earnestly implement the party's national policy, and strive to do a good job in national work. 

　　(7) Strengthening the building of a socialist legal system. 

　　Socialist democracy and the socialist legal system are inseparable. Without the stability and unity of the whole society, economic construction will not be completed, and economic system reform and political system reform will not be completed. All aspects of the country's political life, economic life and social life, all aspects of democracy and dictatorship should be law-abiding, law-abiding, law enforcement must be strict, and violations must be investigated. 

　　We must grasp construction and reform with one hand and the legal system with one hand. The construction of the legal system must go through the whole process of reform. On the one hand, it is necessary to strengthen legislative work, improve law enforcement activities, ensure that judicial organs independently exercise their powers in accordance with the law, and raise citizens' legal awareness; on the other hand, the legal system must guarantee the order of construction and reform, so that the fruits of reform can be consolidated. Things that should be rehabilitated should be clarified as much as possible in the form of law or system. In this way, new norms of political, economic and social life can be formed, and gradually: the relationship between the party and the political organization and other social organizations is institutionalized, the internal activities of the state political organization are institutionalized, and the relationship between the central, local, and grassroots organizations is institutionalized. The cultivation, selection, use and elimination of personnel are institutionalized, the grassroots democratic life is institutionalized, and social consultation and dialogue are institutionalized. In short, reforms should be adopted to make China's socialist democratic politics step by step toward institutionalization and legalization. This is the fundamental guarantee for preventing the recurrence of the "Cultural Revolution" and realizing the country's long-term stability.

　　China's current political system was born out of the revolutionary war era and was basically established during the period of socialist transformation. It was developed in the process of mass mass movements and continuous strengthening of directive plans. It does not adapt to the modernization of economic, political, cultural and other aspects under peaceful conditions and is not suitable for the development of a socialist commodity economy. For this situation, an analysis of history is required. This system is the product of past historical conditions. Now that the situation has developed and the cause of the party has advanced, it is necessary to reform this system. This is an arduous and complicated task. It must adopt a firm and prudent approach. Leaders should gradually develop in an orderly manner and advance as smoothly as possible. During the alternation of the old and new systems, special attention should be paid to preventing disjointed and frictional work. All reforms must focus on experimentation, encourage exploration, and pay attention to finding practical transition measures and methods to achieve gradual progress. Different conditions and conditions vary from country to country, and reform cannot be “one size fits all”. Reforms in ethnic autonomous areas and remote areas should adopt more prudent steps that are appropriate to local conditions. The reform of special economic zones can have greater flexibility. The reform of the military has achieved great results. The situation of the military is different from that of the local government. The reform and deployment will be separately studied and decided by the Central Military Commission. 

　　The immediate goal of political system reform is limited. However, by achieving this goal, we can lay a good foundation for socialist democracy and gradually realize our long-term goals. This is a grand undertaking. All party comrades should devote themselves to this reform with a positive attitude. Party organizations at all levels must strengthen their leadership over reforms and take a good start in the reform of the political system with their own reforms.

6. Strengthening Party Building in Reform and Opening up The

　　Communist Party of China is a party armed with Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought, and a strong party that has withstood long-term struggle and exercise. In order to successfully complete the arduous and complicated tasks identified by this congress and better assume the great historical responsibility of leading the building of socialism with Chinese characteristics, we must study the theory and practice of party building under new conditions, and further change We will adapt to the concepts and practices needed for the new situation and earnestly strengthen party building. 

　　The issue of party building has always been closely linked to the political line of the party. All the work of the party in the new era must ensure the implementation of the party's basic line. The party's own construction must also be reformed to adapt to the new situation of reform and opening up. The party's ideological construction, organizational construction, and work style construction should all reflect this guiding ideology. 

　　In the party's ideological construction, we must comprehensively publicize the party's basic line and firmly grasp a center and two basic points. Party organizations at all levels and party schools should closely contact the reality of the primary stage of socialism, and regularly carry out in-depth education on party members' basic line and party basic knowledge, and unite all party members, especially leading cadres, with the party's basic line. Thoughts and actions have made the majority of Communist Party members a pioneer who consciously struggled to achieve the party's tasks and become a model with ideals, morality, culture, and discipline. The party’s propaganda work and ideological education work must be reformed to overcome formalism and emphasize practical results. It is impossible for us to return to the closed state of the past, to ban people from touching all kinds of thoughts, and to avoid the various ideological and cognitive problems that people have created in construction and reform. This requires abandoning the boring party eight stocks, using the experience and popularized forms of the masses to carry out propaganda and education, so that adhering to the four basic principles and persisting in reform and opening up will truly penetrate the human brain. 

　　The reform and opening up and the development of the socialist commodity economy require us to attach importance to, strengthen and improve the party's ideological and political work. In the reform and opening up, people's thoughts are extremely active. This is a good thing and a phenomenon that conforms to historical laws. We must inherit the good tradition of the party's ideological and political work, and strive to create various effective forms and specific ways to adapt to the new situation, and effectively carry out ideological and political work in all areas of construction and reform, and inspire people's socialist enthusiasm and enthusiasm for creation. And dedication, the power of the whole nation is condensed into the grand cause of building socialism with Chinese characteristics.

　　The quality of the cadre team has a decisive significance for the implementation of the party's line. In line with the party's political line since the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee, the principle of revolutionizing, rejuvenating, intellectualizing, and professionalizing the cadre team proposed by our party has proved to be correct. To insist on revolutionization, the most important thing is to see if he resolutely implements the party's basic line. Those who have both ability and political integrity, fair and decent, that is loyal to the party's line and can creatively implement the party's line, should be reused, and those who only speak empty words, do not do practical things, and lack enthusiasm and responsibility for the cause of socialist modernization should be reused. Adhering to the four basic principles and insisting on reform and opening up must be based on actual performance. It is necessary to use this as a standard to evaluate the merits and demerits of cadres. It is necessary to boldly use those cadres who have made practical contributions to reform, opening up, and socialist modernization, and have been recognized and trusted by the masses. For the outstanding young cadres, we must dare to shoulder the burden. We must protect and support cadres who are brave in exploring and innovating in reform, allowing them to make mistakes, helping them to continuously sum up experience, grow their talents, and learn and grow in practice. In doing so, the leading bodies at all levels can be energized. To achieve the rejuvenation of leading cadres, the current focus is on the rejuvenation of members of the central leadership, and it is recommended that this congress take a big step in this regard. The leading members of the party's local organizations and grass-roots organizations must also be younger, but they cannot mechanically demand that the average age of the provincial, prefecture, county, and grassroots leadership teams be gradually reduced. The age structure within the leadership team should pay attention to the ladder equipment. Adhere to the knowledge and specialization of cadres, we must pay attention to the different requirements of different jobs. Over the past few years, the cooperation and exchanges between the old and new cadres have been very successful, and the leadership teams at all levels have basically met the requirements of the party's line. In the future, we must continue to enrich and improve, make appropriate adjustments, and pay attention to stability.

　　To effectively strengthen the party's institutional construction, the consolidation and development of the party's correct line, and the democratization and scientificization of the party's decision-making are very important for giving full play to the enthusiasm and creativity of party organizations and party members at all levels. To gradually promote people's democracy with inner-party democracy is a practical and easy-to-use way to develop socialist democracy. To improve the party's collective leadership system and democratic centralism, we must start from the central government. Mainly: to establish a system in which the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee regularly reports to the Central Political Bureau and the Political Bureau of the Central Committee to the Central Plenary Meeting; appropriately increase the number of meetings of the Central Plenary Meeting each year, so that the Central Committee can better play the role of collective decision-making; The Standing Committee of the Political Bureau, the working rules of the Central Secretariat and the life meeting system have institutionalized collective leadership and strengthened supervision and restriction on party leaders. Party organizations at all levels must also establish and improve relevant rules of procedure, voting system and life meeting system. It is necessary to reform and improve the electoral system within the party, and clearly stipulate the nomination procedures and the method of electoral elections for intra-party elections. In the near future, the scope of the election for the difference should be first extended to representatives of party congresses at all levels, members of the grass-roots party organizations, secretaries, members of the local party committees, standing committee members, and members of the Central Committee. It is necessary to effectively protect the democratic rights of party members as stipulated in the Party Constitution and formulate specific regulations to protect the rights of party members. Violating the rights of party members is a violation of the party's discipline and must be subject to party discipline. It is necessary to unblock the channels of democracy within the party and to improve the democratic life, so that party members have more opportunities to understand and directly participate in party affairs. The status of the ruling party tends to grow away from the masses within the party, and this tendency is much more harmful to the people than before. The new situation of reform and opening up has made the task of building the party's work style more prominent. Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee, our party has restored and carried forward the fine style of linking theory with practice, closely contacting the masses, criticism and self-criticism. The party's line and policies represent the greatest interests of the broad masses of the people and promote the development of social productive forces. With the reform and opening up, the past high-index, subjective and obsessive commanding, and violent punishments have been greatly reduced. Party organizations at all levels and the majority of party members, the vast majority of party members and cadres, actively and faithfully serve the people, have shown great practical spirit and creative power. As far as these aspects are concerned, it should be true that the link between our party and the masses is greatly enhanced. Reforming the economic and political system and implementing the separation of party and government will further prevent the growth of bureaucraticism within the party and make the party a strong force to fight against bureaucracy. Now that the masses have more opinions and opinions, it is a minority party member, especially some leading cadres who use power for personal gain. It will harm the interests of the masses, interfere with the smooth progress of reform and opening up, and ruin the party’s reputation. This is a serious problem that requires special attention and serious solutions. After the destruction of the "Cultural Revolution", it is absolutely necessary to concentrate on the party for a while.

　　In the previous years, the overall party work, the results are the main. At the same time, it must be pointed out that solving the problem of impure in the party, impure organization, and impure style is a long-term regular work, and it is impossible to solve all problems by a period of rectification. Old problems are solved, and new problems will arise. Our party is in a ruling position and must stand the test of governance. Our party is leading the reform and opening up and must stand the test of reform and opening up. This is the most important issue that must be resolved in the party building in the new era. Such an estimate should be made: on the whole, our party is able to withstand the rigors of the test, and it has the power to fight against various negative corruptions; but it must also be estimated that a small number of party members will not stand the test. In the past few years, tax evasion, smuggling, bribery, law enforcement, extortion, corruption, leakage of state secrets and economic intelligence, violation of foreign affairs, cronyism, retaliation, moral corruption, etc. have occurred in some Communist Party members. . Of course, we cannot change the general policy of reform and opening up because a small number of party members cannot stand the test. Nor can we stop construction and reform to specifically clean up dust. We must put anti-corrosion in construction and reform. In the process of reform and opening up, the struggle against corruption within the party is inevitable. If the tolerant corrupt elements remain in the party, the entire party will be defeated. For party members who cannot stand the test, they must first be enthusiastic about education. However, experience has proved that education alone cannot solve problems completely. It is necessary to strictly manage the party and strictly enforce party discipline. For those corrupt elements who have tarnished the cause of the party and the people, they must adopt a policy of resolutely removing them. Once they are found to be dealt with immediately, how much will be cleared, and they must not tolerate rape.

　　The power and role of the proletarian party mainly depends not on the number of party members, but on the quality of party members, on the steadfastness of their party line and their loyalty to the cause of communism. For a long time, we have a tendency to neglect quality in the work of absorbing party members. Some party members do not meet or do not meet the conditions. Therefore, in order to strictly rule the party, in addition to having to expel a few corrupt elements from the party, we must also focus on educating the vast majority of party members and improving their quality. The party is the vanguard of the working class and is a highly organized disciplined team. If they are party members, they must conform to the standards of party members, strictly accept the discipline of the party, and play the exemplary role of party members. Party members working in the party and government leading organs, especially party members and cadres who are responsible for the main leadership work, should set stricter rules. During the revolutionary war years, Communists must withstand the test of sacrificing their own lives; today, they must stand the test of governance, reform, and openness. Compared with non-party members, Communist Party members must consciously sacrifice more personal interests for the benefit of the country and the people at all times. The reason why the title of the Communist Party is glorious is in this place. The party committee’s requirements for party members cannot of course require non-party masses to do so, but party members must do so. If you can't do it, don't fulfill the obligations stipulated in the party constitution, and if you still can't correct it after education, you should persuade them to quit the party or remove it from the party. Persuasion and delisting are measures that must be taken to maintain the nature of the party’s working class vanguard. For those who leave the party, party organizations at all levels should still unite them with enthusiasm and must not discriminate against them. They can also be good citizens, what strengths can be played, and some can continue to work as appropriate leaders. We must also continue to absorb the advanced elements of the party members that have emerged in the reform and opening up. Righting up can suppress evil. We should actively and promptly commend the good comrades who have strong party spirit and conscious dedication, serve the people wholeheartedly, think for the interests of the people, and exemplaryly implement the party's policies and accomplish the party's tasks. All of this must be done as the main regular work of grassroots party organizations. Regular education, regular supervision, frequent criticism and self-criticism, regular rectification of discipline, frequent elimination of corrupt elements and proper disposal of unqualified elements. We often absorb outstanding elements, constantly carry forward the righteousness and resist the hurricane, unite the masses around the party through the vanguard and exemplary role of party members, and make the party's grassroots organizations a strong fighting fortress. The party’s leading organs have the responsibility to guide grassroots organizations to do these tasks. These regular jobs are done, and we are likely to be in new historical conditions.

　　Reform, especially political system reform, will inject new vitality into the building of our party. We must adapt to this great change and build our great Marxist party. In this way, our party can stand in the forefront of reform and modernization with a brand-new attitude, become a party that is brave in reform and full of vitality, a disciplined, fair and honest party, a party that selects talents and serves the people effectively and effectively. . 

　　7. Striving for a new victory for Marxism in China

　　Socialism with Chinese characteristics is a product of the combination of the basic principles of Marxism with China's modernization and is a scientific socialism rooted in contemporary China. It is the ideological basis for the comrades of the whole party and the people of the whole country to unify their understanding and strengthen unity, and is a great banner that guides our cause forward. 

　　Marxism is a science that is constantly evolving in practice. Marxism needs new developments, which is the general trend of the present era. The world is undergoing tremendous changes, human civilization is advancing by leaps and bounds, and the cause of the working class and the working people has shown new prospects. All of this requires Marxists to open up new horizons, develop new ideas, and enter new realms. 

　　The great historical merits of Marx and Engels are to turn socialism from fantasy to science. Scientific socialism, from doctrine to practice, from the practice of building socialism in one country to the practice of building socialism in many countries, to the practice of reform of the world socialist countries, is the expansion and deepening of socialist re-understanding, all of which are scientific societies. The theory of doctrine combines with the practice of countries and the development of the times. In this process, it is inevitable to abandon the individual assertions that the predecessors are still ignorant of historical conditions and still have utopian factors. It is necessary to break the dogmatic understanding of Marxism and attach to the wrong views under the name of Marxism, which must be based on new practices. Make scientific socialism theory a new development.

　　The combination of Marxism and our practice has gone through more than sixty years. In this process, there are two historic leaps. The first leap occurred during the new-democratic revolution. After repeated explorations, the Chinese Communists found a revolutionary road with Chinese characteristics and brought the revolution to victory on the basis of summing up the successes and failures. The second leap, after the Third Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee, on the basis of summing up the experience of the two sides in the past 30 years, based on the study of international experience and the world situation, the Chinese Communists began to find a construction. The road of socialism with Chinese characteristics has opened up a new stage of socialist construction. Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee, our party has played and developed a series of scientific and theoretical views on philosophy, political economy, and scientific socialism in the process of re-recognizing socialism. Including: the idea of ​​emancipating the mind, seeking truth from facts, and practicing as the sole criterion for testing truth; on building socialism, it is necessary to follow its own national conditions and take its own path; under the conditions of economic and cultural backwardness, there must be a socialist construction. a long-term view of the primary stage; the fundamental task of a socialist society is to develop productive forces and concentrate on the realization of modernization; the view that the socialist economy is a planned commodity economy; and that reform is an important driving force for the development of a socialist society, Openness is the necessary condition for realizing socialist modernization; the view that socialist democratic politics and socialist spiritual civilization are important features of socialism; the two basic points of adhering to the four basic principles and the general policy of persisting in reform and opening up are combined Indispensable views; views on the use of "one country, two systems" to achieve national unity; the view that the ruling party's party style is related to the party's life and death; on independence, complete equality, mutual respect, and mutual exclusion Interfering inside Principles of business, the development of relations with foreign Communist parties and other point of view; on peace and development are the themes of the contemporary world view, and so on. These views constitute the outline of the socialist theory with Chinese characteristics, and initially answer the basic issues of China's socialist construction stage, tasks, dynamics, conditions, layout and international environment, and plan our scientific track for progress. The core issue here is that we must break away from the historical idealism that leaves productivity and abstractly talk about socialism, and fundamentally draw a line between scientific socialism and various kinds of fantasy.

　　Marxist historical materialism has always believed that productivity is the ultimate determining force for all social development. Production relations and superstructures can only promote productivity by adapting to productivity. The emergence of a socialist society, the advancement of socialism from one stage to another, and the realization of communism cannot be separated from the development of productive forces. As early as the revolutionary war, our party made it clear that the role and policy of the policies and practices of all political parties in the Chinese people, in the final analysis, depends on whether it is helpful to the development of the Chinese people’s productive forces. The size of its help, whether it is binding productivity, or liberating productivity. At that time, we must put the class struggle in the center. That is because only by first overthrowing the reactionary class rule, so that the working people are politically free from oppression and economically free from exploitation, can they liberate their productive forces. Now it is different. The exploiting classes have been eliminated, the working people have become the masters of the country, we have entered the period of socialist construction, and the development of productive forces has become a direct central task. The prosperity of the country, the prosperity of the people, the prosperity of education, science and culture, the consolidation and development of public ownership and the people's democratic power. In a word, the full play of socialist superiority and the increasing attraction, in the final analysis, depend on productivity. development of. Everything that is conducive to the development of productive forces is in the fundamental interests of the people and is therefore required by socialism or allowed by socialism. Everything that is not conducive to the development of productive forces is a violation of scientific socialism and is not allowed by socialism. Under such historical conditions, productivity standards are more directly decisive. 

　　Why do we have to adhere to the four basic principles? It is because in contemporary China, only by doing so can we fundamentally guarantee the development of productivity. Why insist on reform and opening up? It is because only by doing so can we further liberate the still-restrained productive forces and promote the rapid development of productive forces. Leaving the standard of productivity and judging life with abstract principles and fantasy models can only ruin the reputation of Marxism. We recognize and give full attention to the huge reactionary effects of production relations and superstructures; however, only by recognizing the decisive role of productivity and recognizing that productivity is the fundamental criterion can we correctly handle the contradiction between productivity and production relations, economic base and superstructure. To ensure that the changes in production relations and superstructure can truly adapt to the conditions and requirements of the development of productive forces in contemporary China, without falling into subjective randomness.

　　The primary stage of socialism is a long historical development process. Our understanding of the status, contradictions, evolution and laws of this stage is still not well known in many respects. Many of our policies, policies, and theories have yet to be perfected. We must continue to undergo testing and be supplemented, revised, and improved as the practice develops. We do not regard the individual assertions in the book as the dogma that binds our hands and feet, nor do we see what we have seen in practice as a perfect model. It is necessary to encourage exploration and development in practical work, and insist on "a hundred flowers bloom and a hundred schools of thought contend" in theoretical research. The view of life and practice is the first and basic point of view of epistemology. Without exploration, no innovation, no comparison of different experiments and discussion of different opinions, our cause is not angry. Efforts to carry forward the scientific spirit and creative vitality of Marxism and invigorate the courage of the nation to explore and innovate are the hopes for the continuous development of our theory and cause. 

　　The overwhelming majority of our party comrades support the line since the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee. They adhere to Marxism and support reform and opening up. Those who adhere to rigid concepts and those who reject Marxism are very few. But within our party, the deviation in understanding will happen frequently. The same person has one-sidedness in this case in one case, and may have one-sidedness on the other in another. Don't say that the thoughts can't keep up with the pace of reform for a while, and don't talk too much about liberating bourgeois liberalization. The generation of deviation and one-sidedness, in the final analysis, is subjective recognition from objective reality. The fundamental way to overcome is to guide everyone towards the reality of modernization and reform, to face the world, and to face the future. "Emancipating the mind, seeking truth from facts, and uniting to look forward" is still our basic slogan. In the great historical process of reform and opening up, there are many contradictions and difficulties. In particular, the comrades of the entire party need to strengthen unity, unify their thinking and understanding, and work together to forge ahead. The party's ranks are united and lively, and our socialist cause must flourish.

　　Great practice requires great theory. China’s one billion people are carrying out the great cause of modernization and reform. Such rich and vivid practice provides us with an inexhaustible source of creative theoretical summarization. At present, the state of the party's Marxist theory construction is very disproportionate to the great cause we are undertaking. Reform and opening up have been going on for many years, and theoretical research and publicity and education in reform and opening up are still a rather weak link. A major task facing all comrades in the party, especially high- and middle-level cadres, is to conscientiously study and master Marxist positions, viewpoints and methods, and better integrate Marxism with the reality of China's construction and reform. The front is better integrated with the realities of each region. Our party is at an important historical moment where the old and the new are alternate. A large number of new comrades join the party's ranks, and a large number of new cadres have embarked on leadership positions at all levels. At such a moment, we must recognize that Marxism must have a new era of great development, and present to the whole party the task of learning and enriching Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought in practice, and building a force that includes a large number of new forces. The creative Marxist theoretical team is more urgent and far-reaching. 

　　Comrades! The task that history gives us is great and arduous. Let our party and the people of all nationalities in the country, together with the democratic parties and people's organizations, unite more closely under the great banner of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. Let our mainland compatriots, together with Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan compatriots and overseas Chinese, unite more closely under the great banner of patriotism in the reunification of the motherland and the revitalization of China. This is the fundamental guarantee for the sure victory of our cause. 

　　Our business is a career ahead. The party and the people always pin their greatest hopes on the thriving youth who represent the future. The rejuvenation of the Chinese nation, the creation of a bright future, and the victory of the cause of socialist modernization depend on the efforts of all the people. In the final analysis, it is up to the vast number of young people to continue to work hard, down-to-earth and hard work.

　　Comrades! The current international situation is beneficial to China's socialist modernization drive. Under the impetus of the great efforts of the people of all countries in the world to maintain peace and seek development, the suppression of the arms race and the expansion of aggression and the call for real disarmament and early resolution of regional conflicts are growing. It is in this context that the United States and the Soviet Union recently reached a principled agreement on the issue of the mediation, and the relationship between the East and the West has eased to a certain extent. We welcome this. But it must be soberly seen that reaching such a principled agreement is only the first step towards reducing armaments. The arms race is far from stopping. The "hot spots" have not been eliminated, and the conflicts in individual areas are still in danger of escalation. The real situation of the international situation will be eased. It will also go through a long, difficult and even tortuous process. People of all countries still have to make unremitting efforts. China will continue to unswervingly pursue an independent foreign policy of peace and develop friendly and cooperative relations with all countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Together with peace-loving countries and people all over the world, we will work hard to promote the international situation to continue to develop in a direction conducive to the people of the world and to world peace. 

　　China's revolution and construction are an important part of the cause of human progress. The birth of the People’s Republic of China once shocked the world and enhanced the influence of the world’s progressive forces and Marxism. The success of China's socialist modernization will surely make new contributions to world peace and human progress, and further enhance the attraction of scientific socialism. On the journey to achieve the grand goal of socialist modernization, we have achieved the first victory. We also have to fight for the new and greater victory in the second and third steps. We firmly believe that the road to building socialism with Chinese characteristics will surely become broader and wider!